6.1 { Grade 4 | Term 1


                                                            Section 6.1
                                                   Grade 4 | Term 1
 Stra
 nds
                    Topics        Sub Topics                              Learning Outcomes                       Lessons


                               Problem solving     1. Create and solve problems involving place value,
                                                   factors, multiples, and fractions.

                    General                                                                                       3
                               Investigative       2. Use appropriate strategies (pen and paper
                                                   computation, mental computation, or a calculator) to
                               strategies
                                                   investigate number concepts.


                               Counting forwards
                               and backwards       3. Count in a variety of ways: counting forward,
                               Skip counting       counting backwards, skip counting, counting on.
                               Counting on
                    Counting                                                                                      4
                                                   4. Identify the pattern in a sequence of numbers
                               Sequences of
                                                   5. Complete sequences of numbers.
                               numbers
                                                   6. Generate number sequences.

                                                   7. Read numbers, up to 9 999.




  Number Concepts
                               Reading and
                               writing numbers
                                                   8. Write numbers up to 9 999 in words and numerals.                 3.0
                                                                                                                       wk
                                                   9. Identify the place value and total value of any digit in
                                                   numbers up to 9 999.

                               Place value         10. Write numbers up to 9 999 in expanded notation.

                                                   11. Arrange a set of two-, three-, and/or four-digit numbers
                                                   in order of magnitude.
                     Whole
                                                   12. Explain the meaning of factors and multiples.              14
                    Numbers
                                                   13. Generate multiples of a given number.

                               Factors and         14. List the factors of a given number.
                               multiples
                                                   15. Explain the concepts of prime number and
                               Primes and          composite number.
                               composites
                                                   16. Identify prime numbers and composite numbers.

                                                   17. Classify numbers in a variety of ways, e.g., as
                                                   primes, composite, odd, and/or even.



                                                                 { 41 {
                                                                             Chapter 6 { Grade 4        ≪ Annual Plan ≫

Stra
nds
               Topics       Sub Topics                               Learning Outcomes                           Lessons


                         Computation-       1. Use computation vocabulary (e.g., sum, product, total,
                                            etc.) to describe situations that involve any of the four basic
                         related vocabulary
                                            operations.

                         Relationships
                         among the four      2. Explain the relationships that exist among the four
                                             basic operations.
                         basic operations

                                           3. Explain strategies that may be used to determine
                         Checking the      the reasonableness of answers.
                         reasonableness of
                         answers           4. Determine the reasonableness of an estimated or exact
                                           answer to a computation, and justify their conclusion.

               General                                                                                           7
                                             5. Explain mental computation strategies that may be used
                                             in calculation involving addition, subtraction, multiplication or
                                             division.

                                             6. Explain pencil and paper computation procedures that
                                             may be used in calculations involving addition, subtraction,
                         Computation         multiplication, and division.
                         strategies



 Computation
                                             7. Explain how to use a calculator to carry out
                                             addition, subtraction, multiplication, or division.                      2.5
                                                                                                                      wk
                                             8. Select an appropriate computation strategy (mental
                                             computation, use of pencil and paper, or use of a calculator)
                                             to carry out addition, subtraction, multiplication, or division.


                         Problem solving     9. Create and solve problems involving addition,
                                             subtraction, multiplication, and /or division.

                                             10. Recall the basic facts for addition and subtraction.
                         Basic facts
                                             11. Use several strategies to recall the basic facts
                                             for multiplication and division.

                Whole                        12. Add numbers with up to four digits without regrouping.
                                                                                                                 11
               Numbers
                                             13. Add numbers with up to four digits with regrouping in
                                             one place/column only.
                         Addition without
                         and with
                         regrouping          14. Add numbers with up to four digits with regrouping in
                                             two places/columns.

                                             15. Add numbers with up to four digits with regrouping in
                                             three places/ columns.



                                                            { 42 {
6.1 { Grade 4 | Term 1


 Stra
 nds
                    Topics           Sub Topics                               Learning Outcomes                              Lessons

                                                      1. Analyse real-life situations that involve data management to
                                  Use of statistics in identify the questions, data collection methods, and data
                   General        real life            representation methods that were used.                                3

                                                      2. State reasons why people collect data.

                                                      3. Describe the characteristics of questionnaires.


   Statistics                     Use of observation 4. Prepare simple questionnaires and interviews.
                                  and interviewing
                                                     5. Describe procedures for collecting data using observation,                2.0
                                  Introduction to    interviews, or simple questionnaires.                                        wk
                                  questionnaires
                Data Collection                       6. Generate questions that may be answered through data                11
                                                      collection, representation and interpretation.

                                  Planning for data
                                                      7. Plan data collection activities.
                                  collection

                                                      8. Collect data through observation, interviews, or simple
                                  Collecting data
                                                      questionnaires.


                                  Attributes of
                                  cubes, cuboids,     1. Identify the relationship between the number of faces, edges,
                                  cylinders, cones,   and vertices of cubes and cuboids.
                                  and spheres


                   Three-         Nets of cubes and 2. Make nets of cubes and cuboids.
                 Dimensional      cuboids                                                                                    8
                   Shapes

                                  Making cubes and 3. Construct cubes and cuboids.

   Geometry
                                  cuboids

                                                      4. Create and solve problems based on the attributes of cubes,              2.0
                                  Problem solving                                                                                 wk
                                                      cuboids, cylinders, cones and spheres.

                                                      5. Explain the concepts of angle and right angle.

                                                      6. Draw and label angles e.g., angle A.

                                                      7. Classify angles according to size, e.g., angles less than a
                Plane Shapes Angles                   right angle, angles larger than a right angle, angles that are right   6
                                                      angles.

                                                      8. Identify right angles in two-dimensional and three-
                                                      dimensional shapes.



                                                                     { 43 {
                                                                               Chapter 6 { Grade 4 ≪ Annual Plan ≫

Stra
nds
                 Topics        Sub Topics                               Learning Outcomes                         Lessons

                            Problem solving     1. Create and solve problems involving measurement.
                            Use of
                            measurement         2. Explain how to use various instruments of
                                                measurements (ruler, scale, etc).
                            instruments

                 General    Selection of        3. Select the most appropriate instrument to measure an object.   3
                            instruments and
                            units of
                            measurement         4. Select the most appropriate unit to measure an object.

                            Recording           5. Read and record measurements using appropriate notation.
                            measurements

                            Estimation and
                            measurement
                                                6. Estimate and measure lengths and heights of objects
                            using the metre,
                                                using the metre and/or centimetre as the unit of measure.
                            centimetre, and
                            millimetre

                                                7. Draw a line segment of a given length in centimetres.

                                                8. Measure line segments and curves using the centimetre
                                                as the unit of measure.

                                                9. Justify the need for the millimetres as a unit of measure.



 Measurement
                 Linear    Relationships
               Measurement between units        10. Estimate and measure lengths of objects using                 13
                                                the millimetres as the unit of measure.                                3.5
                                                                                                                       wk
                                                11. State the relationship between the millimetre
                                                and centimetre, and the millimetre and metre.

                                                12. Compare the length or height of objects given
                                                their measurement in the same or different units.

                                                13. Explain what is a scale drawing and how scale drawings
                                                are used in real life.
                            Scale drawing
                                                14. Use circle drawings (e.g. maps) to determine distances
                                                in kilometres or metres.

                                                15. Estimate and measure the mass of objects using
                                                kilograms and grams.
                            Estimation and
                            measurement         16. Justify the need for milligrams as a unit of mass.
                            using the kilogram,
                            gram, and           17. Describe situations in real life where the milligram is
                            milligram           used as a unit of measure.
                  Mass                                                                                            8
                                                18. Estimate and measure the mass of objects in milligrams.

                                                19. State the relationship between the milligram and
                            Relationships
                                                gram, kilogram and gram.
                            between units
                                                20. Compare the mass of objects given their measurement
                                                of mass in the same or different units.


                                                               { 44 {
6.2 { Grade 4 | Term 2


                                                           Section 6.2
                                                 Grade 4 | Term 2
 Stra
 nds                Topics       Sub Topics                              Learning Outcomes                            Lessons

                                                  18. Find the least common multiple of two or three whole
                              Least common        numbers, by listing multiples.
                              multiple            19. Find the highest common factor of two or three numbers by
                                                  listing factors.




  Number concepts
                                                  20. Round off two-, three-, or four-digit numbers to the nearest
                     Whole                                                                                                  1.5
                                                  10.                                                                  11
                    Numbers   Rounding off                                                                                  wk
                                                  21. Round off three- or four-digit numbers to the nearest 100.

                                                  22. Identify the ordinal position of an object in an arrangement.
                              Ordinal numbers
                                                  23. Identify the object that corresponds to a given ordinal
                                                  position in an arrangement.

                                                  16. Carry out subtractions involving numbers with up to
                                                  four digits, without regrouping.

                                                  17. Carry out subtraction involving numbers with up to four
                              Subtraction         digits, with regrouping in one place/column only.
                              without and with
                              regrouping          18. Carry out subtraction involving numbers with up to four
                                                  digits, with regrouping in two places/columns.

                                                  19. Carry out subtraction involving numbers with up to four
                                                  digits, with regrouping in three places/columns.
                              Addition without
                              and with
                              regrouping


  Computation
                                                  20. Explain the regrouping process for addition and subtraction.
                              Subtraction
                     Whole    without and with                                                                              3.0
                                                                                                                      21
                    Numbers   regrouping                                                                                    wk

                              Multiplication by  21. Multiply a two-digit number by a one-digit number, with and
                              one- and two-digit without regrouping.
                              numbers            22. Multiply a two-digit number by a two-digit number.

                                                  23. Divide a two-digit number by one-digit number, with and
                              Division by one-    without remainder.
                              digit numbers       24. Divide a three-digit number by a one-digit number, without
                                                  and with remainder.

                                                 25. Explain the meaning of the remainder in division.
                              Calculations
                              involving brackets 26. Carry out calculations involving brackets and several
                                                 operations.



                                                                { 45 {
                                                                                             Chapter 6 { Grade 4   ≪ Annual Plan ≫

Stra
nds
                 Topics         Sub Topics                                        Learning Outcomes                       Lessons

                             Use of tales and
                                                  9. Use tally charts and tables to organize collected data.
                             graphs


                                                  10. Select appropriate means (pictograph or bar graph) to
                                                  represent collected data, and give reasons for their selection.

 Statistics
                  Data                                                                                                           1.5
                                                                                                                            10
              Representation Selection of                                                                                        wk
                             appropriate scales 11. Select appropriate scales for constructing pictographs and
                             for drawing graphs bar graphs.


                                                  12. Construct pictograph and bar graphs to represent organised
                                                  data.


                             Attributes of two-
                                                  9. Describe two-dimensional shapes in terms of number of
                             dimensional
                                                  sides and the number and measure of angles.
                             shapes


                                                  10. Classify triangles according to the measure of their angles.



 Geometry
                                                                                                                                 1.5
              Plane Shapes                                                                                                  10
                                                  11. Describe the attributes of squares and rectangles.                         wk
                             Attributes of
                             triangles, squares,
                             rectangles, and
                             circles             12. Identify the similarities and differences between squares
                                                 and rectangles.


                                                  13. Explain how squares and rectangles are related.




                                                                      { 46 {
6.2 { Grade 4 | Term 2


 Stra
 nds
                   Topics          Sub Topics                                Learning Outcomes                           Lessons


                                                     21. Estimate and measure the capacity of containers in litres
                                                     or centilitres.


                               Estimation and        22. justify the need for the millimetre as a unit of measure
                               measurement           of capacity.
                               using the litre,
                               centilitre, and
                               millilitre as units   23. Estimate and measure the capacity of containers using
                               of measure            the millilitre as the unit of measure.
                  Capacity                                                                                               8
                                                     24. Describe situations in real life where the millilitre is used
                                                     as a measurement of capacity.


                                                     25. State the relationship between the millilitre and centilitre,
                                                     the millilitre and litre.
                               Relationships
                               between units
                                                     26. Compare the capacity of containers given their
                                                     measurement of capacity in the same or different units.




  Measurement
                                                     27. Read recorded temperatures.                                         2.5
                               Recording                                                                                     wk
                               and reading
                               temperatures
                                                     28. Identify the scales that are used to measure temperature.


                Temperature                          29. Measure their body temperature and the temperature of           5
                                                     liquids.
                               Temperatures
                               related to common
                               everyday
                               situations        30. Indicate and write temperatures associated with real life
                                                 situations. (e.g., normal body temperature; freezing and boiling
                                                 points of water; oven temperature for baking a cake etc.)



                               Calculation           31. Calculate the perimeter of a two-dimensional shape.
                               of perimeter


                Perimeter and Introduction to the
                                                     32. Explain the concept of area.                                    5
                    Area      concept of area


                               Area by counting      33. Find the area of two-dimensional shapes by
                               squares               counting squares.



                                                                    { 47 {
                                                                                 Chapter 6 { Grade 4 ≪ Annual Plan ≫

                                                           Section 6.3
                                               Grade 4 | Term 3
Stra
nds                 Topics        Sub Topics                              Learning Outcomes                        Lessons


                                                   24. Identify unit and proper fractions of a whole or group
                                                   of objects.
                               Representing unit
                               and proper
                               fractions
                                                   25. Represent unit and proper fractions of a whole or group
                                                   of objects.


                                                   26. Sequence unit fractions in order of magnitude.


                                                   27. Compare proper fractions with like denominator.


                               Comparing and       28. Sequence proper fractions with like denominator in order
                               sequencing          of magnitude.
                               fractions




 Number Concepts
                                                   29. Compare fractions with unlike but related denominators.

                                                                                                                         2.0
                   Fractions                                                                                        14
                                                   30. Sequence fractions with unlike but related denominators in wk order
                                                   of magnitude.


                                                   31. Explain the concepts of improper fractions and
                                                   mixed numbers.


                               Improper fractions
                                                  32. Identify improper fractions and mixed numbers.
                               and mixed
                               numbers

                                                   33. Convert improper fractions to mixed numbers and
                                                   mixed numbers to improper fractions, using concrete
                                                   objects and pictures/diagrams.


                                                   34. Generate sets of fractions that are equivalent to a
                                                   given fraction.
                               Equivalent
                               fractions
                                                   35. Explain the meaning of the term ‘equivalent fractions.’




                                                                 { 48 {
6.3 { Grade 4 | Term 3


 Stra
 nds
                  Topics            Sub Topics                              Learning Outcomes                             Lessons


                                                     27. Add a fraction to a whole number.



                                 Addition of proper 28. Add two proper fractions with like denominators.
                                 fractions

                                                     29. Add two proper fractions with unlike but related
                                                     denominators, using concrete objects and pictures/diagrams.



                                                     30. Carry out subtraction involving two proper fractions with like



  Computation
                                                     denominators, no regrouping;
                                                                                                                                2.5
                  Fractions      Subtraction of                                                                            17
                                                                                                                                wk
                                 proper fractions
                                                     31. Carry out subtraction involving two proper fractions with
                                                     unlike but related denominators, no regrouping, using concrete
                                                     objects and pictures/diagrams.



                                                     32. Multiply a fraction by a whole number, using concrete
                                 Multiplication of   objects and pictures/diagrams.
                                 proper fractions
                                 and whole
                                 numbers
                                                     33. Multiply a whole number by a proper fraction, using concrete
                                                     objects and pictures/diagrams.



                                 Reading data
                                                   13. Read data represented in tables, pictographs and bar
                                 presented in
                                                   graphs.
                                 tables and graphs



  Statistics
                     Data                                                                                                       1.0
                                                                                                                           7
                Interpretation                                                                                                  wk
                                 Answering
                                 questions based
                                                   14. Interpret data represented in tables, pictograph, and bar
                                 on information
                                                   graphs.
                                 presented in
                                 tables and graphs




                                                                   { 49 {
                                                                                          Chapter 6 { Grade 4   ≪ Annual Plan ≫

Stra
nds
              Topics          Sub Topics                                       Learning Outcomes                       Lessons


                                                14. Explain the concepts of radius, diameter, and centre of
                                                a circle.
                           Attributes of
                           triangles, squares,
                           rectangles, and     15. Identify the centre of a circle.
                           circles


                                                16. Identify and draw radii and diameters of a circle.



                                                17. Draw and label line segments (e.g., line segment AB).

                           Line segments,
                           types of line        18. Identify and draw horizontal and vertical line segments.
                           segments

                                                19. Identify and draw intersecting lines.



 Geometry
                                                                                                                        14
                                                                                                                             2.0
            Plane Shapes                        20. Classify curves as simple, open, or closed.
                                                                                                                             wk

                           Types of curves
                                                21. Draw curves according to given directions, e.g.,
                                                simple, open, simple and closed, simple and open, etc.



                                                22. Explain the concept of a point.


                           Concept of a point 23. Represent points.



                                                24. Identify and draw points inside or outside a closed figure.



                                                25. Identify and draw lines of symmetry in an object or diagram.
                           Symmetry

                                                26. Complete drawings of diagrams that are symmetrical.




                                                                   { 50 {
6.3 { Grade 4 | Term 3


 Stra
 nds
                Topics      Sub Topics                               Learning Outcomes                           Lessons

                                             34. Tell and write the time on the hour, half hour, quarter
                                             hour, and 5-minute intervals in a variety of ways.


                                             35. Tell and write time using one-minutes intervals in a
                         Telling and         variety of ways.
                         representing time

                                             36. Represent a given time on an analogue or digital clock.


                                             37. State and write dates in a variety of ways.


                Time     Time-related        38. Use time-related vocabulary to describe real life situations:   9
                         vocabulary          e.g., anniversary, decade, century, millennium, and leap year.


                         Relationships
                         between          39. State the relationship between measures of time: e.g., week
                                          and day, day and year, year and month, hour and minute.
                         measures of time


                         Duration            40. Estimate and measure the duration of an event and the
                         between events      time between two events.




  Measurement
                         Time between        41. Calculate the duration of an event, and the time                    2.5
                         events              between two events.                                                     wk


                         Description of
                         Eastern Caribbean 42. Describe the notes and coins in circulation.
                         currency


                                             43. Read and write amounts of money up to $9999.99.
                         Representing
                         amounts of money 44. Represent amounts of money up to $100 using
                                             various combinations of notes and coins.


                Money                        45. Calculate the total cost of a set of items, given the price     9
                                             per item or the price of a multiple of items.
                         Calculations
                         involving money     46. Calculate change from amounts up to $50.


                                             47. Fill in bank deposit and withdrawal slips.


                                             48. Use vocabulary associated with money and spending:
                         Money-related
                                             e.g., sale, per, each, for each, discount, $--- off, expensive,
                         vocabulary
                                             cheap etc.
{ 51 {
