                         THE AGENCY FOR PUBLIC INFORMATION
                               P.O Box 608, Kingstown, St Vincent and The Grenadines

                                        Tel: (784) 456-1600, Fax (784) 456-2430

                                            Email: apisvg2023@gmail.com




3/10/2024

NEW PRIMARY SCHOOL CURRICULUM TO BE IMPLEMENTED
           IN SVG AND ACROSS THE OECS

The Ministry of Education began a series of stakeholder consultation and
sensitization sessions on Wednesday, October 2, to garner feedback on the first
draft of a new curriculum which will be fully implemented in primary schools
in St Vincent and the Grenadines (SVG), and across other OECS countries.

This new curriculum, referred to as the Digital OECS Harmonized Primary
Curriculum (D-OHPC), will this year be micro-piloted in 15 primary schools
across SVG. The new curriculum is being developed under the OECS
Programme for Educational Advancement and Relevant Learning (OECS
PEARL).

Some of the benefits of the new curriculum are more emphasis on student engagement, it
embraces advanced technologies and it is more accessible to all.

Education Focal Point, Aldia Gumbs- Dyer said the objectives of
the stakeholder consultation and sensitization sessions are to orient parents to the
new D-OHPC, to allow parents to interact with the D-OHPC, to gather feedback on the
new D-OHPC for enhancement of the document and to strengthen partnership among
stakeholders.

She said the D-OHPC will be crucial for ensuring that primary school students
in SVG receive the best possible learning experience, preparing them for further
learning and living.

Gumbs-Dyer pointed out that: “Time has changed and because of that they recognize
that the education system cannot stay the same.” She noted that it must be revamped to
meet the current needs of the students.
Providing an update on the D-OHPC, the Education Focal Point noted they
have consulted with stakeholders, trained curriculum writers and have begun
writing/drafting the new curriculum. She noted that some seventy-six (76) people from
across the region were trained by the University of the West Indies to develop the skills to
draft the new curriculum.

Gumbs-Dyer noted that in September 2025, all of the schools will be brought on board to
work with the curriculum, then the document will be finalized and will be implemented in
all primary schools in September 2026.

The current curriculum was implemented 17 years ago.

                                          --End--
