    Unit:        matter and materials (grade 4)

    DURATION: 4 Lessons

    OBJECTIVES
    Students should be able to:

        1. Measure volume and mass of materials.

    PROCESS SKILLS
    Manipulating, Recording, Observing

    MATERIALS
    Rulers, assorted cuboids, measuring cylinders, balances/scales,
    assorted objects.

    CONTENT SUMMARY
    -     All objects occupy space.
    -     The amount of space that an object takes up is called its volume.
    -     The volume of a regular solid, like a box, can be found by
          measuring the length, width and height (with a ruler) and then
          multiplying the length by the width by the height.
    -     The volume of a liquid can be found using a measuring
                                 3
          cylinder marked in cm .
    -      The mass of an object is the amount of matter in the object. Mass is
           measured with a balance and the unit of mass is grams or kilograms.

    STUDENT ACTIVITIES

    Activity 1

         Let students examine measuring cylinders and discuss how to
          use them correctly
          Get 3 cups of different sizes. Fill each cup with water and label
         the cups 1, 2, 3.
          Let students estimate the volume of water in each cup.
          Pour the water from 1 into the measuring cylinder and record
         the volume.
          Repeat the process and record the volume of water in cups 2
          and 3 Compare the volume of water that each cup can hold.




                                                                              44
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Matter & Materials – K - 6


        Create some problem situations for students:- For example:
            What happens to the volume of each liquid as we pour them
            from one cup to another of a different shape etc?
            Let students predict and test their predictions.

    Activity 2

        Give students an assortment of cubes and cuboids. Pupils identify
         the length, width and height. (N.B. ensure that the dimensions
        are regular).
         Discuss the formula for calculating volume. (Link with Mathematics)

          Using rulers, students measure and record the length, width
          and height of the boxes/books.
          Students record their measurement on a recording sheet.

    Object           Length           Width            Height           Volume




    Activity 3

        Explain the concept of mass.
         Present balances/kitchen scales and discuss their use and how
        they work.
         Students are given an assortment of objects and use
         the balances/scales to Record the mass of each unit.

    Activity 4

        Create problem situations for students: For example -
         Would the same volume of different materials have the same

          volume? Let students predict and test their predictions.


    ASSESSMENT
        Assessment of record sheets.
        Students write instructions on how to find the volume/mass of
        an object
        Students estimate the mass/volume of an object and measure
         and record the actual mass/volume of the object.




                                                                                 45
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Matter & Materials – K - 6



    DURATION: 3 Lessons

    SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES

    Students should be able to:

    (i)     List the physical properties of matter.
    (ii)    Determine the physical properties of matter by using instruments.
    (iii)   Construct an instrument to measure mass or volume.



    PROCESS SKILLS

    Manipulating, Recording, Observing



    MATERIALS:

    Rulers, thermometers, balances, measuring cylinders
    An assortment of objects (hot, cold, warm, water)



    CONTENT SUMMARY
         An object or material has various characteristics which include
         length, temperature, mass, volume.
         Some of these characteristics depend on the amount of material we
         have (mass, volume, length) while others do not (temperature).
         We use a variety of instruments to record the properties of matter:

                        Length –ruler
                        Temperature – thermometer
                        Mass – balance
                        Volume – measuring cylinder

         When making things it is important to measure accurately.

    STUDENT ACTIVITIES
    Activity I

         Students are given an assortment of objects and asked to
          compare them using terms such as:


                                                                                 46
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Matter & Materials – K - 6



                   Heavy – light,
                   Long – short
                   Wide – narrow
                   Warm – cool

           Discuss the physical properties of the object using terms such
           as length, temperature, mass.
           Relate the terms used to compare the objects to the properties e.g.
           warm/cool – temperature.

    Activity II

        Students are given rulers. Teacher explains how to use the rulers
         Students are given assortment of objects and rulers. Students use
         their rulers to record the length of the objects (N.B. students may
         also record the length of objects in the classroom).

    Activity III

        Present students with thermometer. Discuss the use of
         thermometers. Put students in groups and present students with
         an assortment of liquids at varying temperatures. Students use the
         thermometers to record the temperature of the liquids. Compare
           Students also record room temperature and their body temperature.

        (Safety precaution – Use underarm thermometers and observe
         proper hygiene when going from one student to another)

    Activity IV
        Present students with balances/scales. Explain their use.
           Students use the balance/scales to record the mass of various
           objects. Group members compare their results.

  Activity V
      Present students with graduated measuring cylinders. Discuss the
        use of measuring cylinders.
         Students are given a variety of containers filled with water and
         asked to use the measuring cylinder to determine the volume of
         water in each container.

           Students pour specified, volume of water into their measuring cylinder.

    Activity VI
        In groups students construct an instrument using everyday
           material and demonstrate its use. e.g. A balance




                                                                                     47
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Matter & Materials – K - 6




    ASSESSMENT

           Given pictures of instruments, pupils identify them and the
            property they are used to measure.



    INSTRUMENT PROPERTY I.



    II.


    III.


           Assessment of students records from the activities
          Individual students make a book of measurement which should include
             (i)     Diagrams/pictures/model of each instrument
             (ii)    The length of their body, toes, feet, fingers, etc
             (iii)   Their body temperature, temperature of the classroom
             (iv)    Their mass

             Students collect and display various containers that have
             varying volumes.
            Rating scale to assess students skills in using measuring instruments.
           Let students follow a recipe or write their own recipes where precise
            volumes and masses and temperatures are important. By observing the
            product, teacher can determine how accurate the students were in their
            measurements of volume, mass, temperature




                                                                                     48
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Matter & Materials – K - 6


    DURATION: 3 Lessons

    OBJECTIVES
    Students should be able to:

              1. Give examples of physical change.

    PROCESS SKILLS
    Observing, Manipulating, Analyzing


    MATERIALS
    Hot water, wax, butter, chocolate, chalk, salt water, candle,
    matches, containers, plastic cups, stones


    CONTENT SUMMARY
        Materials can change.
        We can change their shape, colour, physical state, etc.
        If they only change in appearance e.g. (colour, shape, size, state)
         the change is known as a physical change. Physical changes
         include change of state, such as from liquid to gas, liquid to solid
        and the reverse.
        Physical changes can often be reversed easily.


    STUDENT ACTIVITIES
    Activity I:

        Put students in groups and give each group chocolate, candle
         wax, butter, styrofoam cups, hot water, metal bottle stoppers.
         Students place a small amount of each substance into the bottle
         stoppers. Float the bottle stoppers on the surface of the hot
         water, observe what happens to each substance. Record the
         observation. Remove the stoppers and allow the substances to
         cool. Observe and record what happens in the table provided.




                                                                                49
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Matter & Materials – K - 6


Items                       Appearance before           Appearance after




Activity II

    Put students into groups. Provide each group with chalk. Students
     wrap the chalk with paper and use the stone to pound the chalk
     into a powder. Students observe the powder and discuss whether
     the change is physical.

Activity III

    Students are given salt and some water to make a salt solution.
     Discuss with students whether the salt has gone through a
     physical change.
        Students (with teacher’s supervision) use a heat source to evaporate
        the water from the salt solution. Discuss the observations.



ASSESSMENT
    Assessment of students’ record sheets.
    Given a description of changes students determine whether they
     are physical or not.
   
   
    Unit : FORCES, MOTION AND STRUCTURES
           (grade 4)
    DURATION: 6 Lessons

    OBJECTIVES
    Students should be able to:

       -   Observe that the material used in a tower affects its strength.
       -   Infer that the strength and stability of a structure depend on its shape.

    PROCESS SKILL

    Observing, Manipulating, Inferring

    MATERIALS

    Drinking straws, cardboard, pair of scissors, tape, small sticks, pins,
    paper fasteners

    CONTENT SUMMARY
        The strength of a structure is its ability to maintain its shape
         and to remain in one piece.

        The stability of a structure is its ability to maintain its original
         position despite the forces that push on it. Unstable structures will
         topple over easily.

        The shape of structures affects their strength.
        Structures may have shapes such as triangles(pyramids),
         circles (spheres) , squares (cubes), rectangles.
        Rectangular structures with the long side at the bottom are
        very stable.
        Rectangular structures with the short side at the base are not
        very stable.
        Triangular structures are very stable.

        Towers are very tall structures. The materials from which they
         are made must be very strong.


    Activity 1:



                                                                                       41
    Primary Science & Technology Teachers’ Guide – Forces Motion and Structure – K - 6


    Let students construct a tower using two different materials-drinking
    straws, and sticks. Let them apply approximately the same force on both
    structures, and compare the results.

    Activity 2:

    Let students make simple rectangle with strip of card. Let them
    secure the corners with paper fasteners. Let students also make
    triangles with strip of the same card. Let students press down on the
    structures with their fingers and see what happens. Let students add
    a diagonal strip as a brace to the rectangular structure and see what
    happens to its strength.



                    - Triangle                          - Square




    Activity 3:

    Pictures of structures of bridges, roofs of houses, arches and
    other suitable structures could be presented for discussions.


    ASSESSMENT

       Paper and pencil test
        Let groups compete in designing structures with greatest strength
         and stability.




                                                                                     42
    Primary Science & Technology Teachers’ Guide – Forces Motion and Structure – K - 6


    TOPIC: THE FORCE OF GRAVITY

    DURATION: 2 Lessons


    OBJECTIVE:

    The students should be able to:

        Observe the effects of gravity on the motion of objects.



    PROCESS SKILLS
    Inferring, Observing



    MATERIALS
    Strings of different thickness, objects of differing
    masses, strong chairs.



    CONTENT SUMMARY
        All objects pull on other objects around them with a force
        called gravity.
        Very large objects like the earth have very strong gravity and their
         pull affects the motion of other objects.
        All objects on Earth experience the earth’s gravity which pulls
        them vertically towards the centre of the Earth..
        Gravity, like magnetism, is a force that can affect an object
         from a distance (without touching it).



    SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES
       Ø Students consider the following:

                  When they throw up a ball (in an upward
                 direction), it eventually changes direction and falls.
                 Fruits fall from trees.
                  Water falls to the Earth, etc.



                                                                                     43
Primary Science & Technology Teachers’ Guide – Forces Motion and Structure – K - 6


   Ø Students are asked to jump up on to a strong chair and to jump
     down from the same chair. They indicate which is easier to do and
     suggest why?

   Ø Students consider how we keep things from falling, e.g. by strings, by
     hanging, by putting supports under them. They suggest why these
     things do not fall. What happens if you remove the support?

       Students investigate the thickness of string needed to keep
       objects of different masses suspended from the same height, and
       make inferences.

   Ø Students consider examples where objects do not fall or remain
     suspended e.g. aeroplanes. Students try to explain how this happens.

   Ø Students consider the effects of the Earth’s gravity and what would
     happen without it. Teacher mentions that the Earth’s gravity also
     affects other heavenly bodies. Teacher points out that all objects
     have gravity but unless the object is very large, their gravity
     cannot easily be detected and does not affect human activities.

ASSESSMENT
             Students write an essay on “The Earth without gravity”.
    UNIT:             ENERGY (GRADE 4)

    DURATION:               1 Lesson

    OBJECTIVES
    Students should be able to:

             1. Explain how a thermometer works.

    PROCESS SKILLS
    Observing, Designing

    MATERIALS
    Small clear bottles (heat resistant), drinking straws, Styrofoam plates
    (the sort in which meats/burgers are packaged), play dough/plasticine,
    tape, water, red dye, alcohol thermometers, ice cubes, heat source (spirit
    burner, candle, Bunsen burner)

    CONTENT SUMMARY
               How hot or cold something is known as temperature. A
        thermometer is used to measure temperature.
               There are different kinds of thermometers. The most
         common is one which contains a liquid in a glass tube.
               The glass tube has a bulb which contains most of the
         liquid and a narrow hole which runs through the length of the tube.
        The two most common liquids used are mercury and alcohol.
        As temperature increases, the liquid in the bulb expands
        and moves further up the tube.
               The glass tube has markings and numbers on it, similar to
         those on a ruler. These markings and numbers, however, represent
         degrees, the unit in which temperature is measured.




                                                                            48
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Energy – K - 5


SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES
   Ø Divide class into groups and distribute a thermometer (alcohol) to each
     group. Instruct students to be very careful in handling the thermometer
     since it can break easily. Let students do the following:
          record all the features they observe (2) make a drawing of the
      thermometer.

      When these two activities have been completed, lead a whole class
      discussion aimed at establishing the features of a thermometer.

   Ø Distribute a container containing some warm water (about 50°c)
     and one containing some water and ice to each group. Let students
     place the bulb of the thermometer in each of the containers. Use
     questions to stimulate class discussion on what happened to the
     alcohol when the thermometer was placed in the warm water? Why
     did that happen? How would you explain what happened? Do you
     think the same thing would happen if it was water in the
     thermometer instead of alcohol? etc. Tell students that alcohol used
     in thermometers is colourless, but a red dye is added to the alcohol
     in thermometers. Ask students if they could suggest why.




ASSESSMENT

Quiz on reasons for movement of alcohol level in the thermometer.




                                                                          49
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Energy – K - 5


    DURATION: 2 Lessons

    OBJECTIVES
    Students should be able to:

       Ø Use a thermometer to measure temperature.
       Ø Use an appropriate form to display results of experiments.
       Ø List situations where the use of a thermometer is important.

    PROCESS SKILLS
    Measurement, Recording

    MATERIALS
    Thermometers (preferably alcohol), worksheets

    CONTENT SUMMARY
               The thermometer is used to measure temperature.
               The bulb of the thermometer must be placed in the
               substance/ material whose temperature is being measured.
               Thermometers are used to measure body temperature,
                atmospheric temperature, temperature of meats that are
                being cooked or stored, etc.


    SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES
       Ø Divide class into working groups and let each group conduct the
         following investigations:

                 To measure and record the atmospheric temperature over a
                 five-day period.
                 To measure the atmospheric temperature at different times
                 during a particular day.

          Each group should be provided with a thermometer and a
          worksheet for each of the activities and should be given specific
          instructions as to how the investigation should be conducted.
          For investigation (a) the temperature reading must be taken at the
          same place and same time each day.
          For investigation (b) the temperature reading should be taken at
          the same place.



                                                                           50
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Energy – K - 5



WORKSHEET A


         DAY                  TEMPERATURE                       WEATHER
                                                               CONDITIONS




WORKSHEET B

                TIME                                TEMPERATURE
 9:00 AM
11:00 AM
 1:00 AM
  3:00 AM


Engage students in a whole class discussion around the results of the
worksheets:-

          Ø Why was it necessary to record the temperature at the same
            place and time of day in Activity A?
          Ø Why was it important to take the reading at the same place
            in activity B?
          Ø Why were the readings the same/different in Activity A?
          Ø Why did the temperature change/not change in Activity B?

          Describe situations where it is important to
          record/know temperature.

   2. Let students display the information collected in an appropriate
      form: Bar Chart, Line Graph.


ASSESSMENT
    Grade students’ presentations of bar charts and line graphs



                                                                            51
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Energy – K - 5



    DURATION: 4 Lessons

    OBJECTIVES
    Students should be able to:

       1. Investigate the effect of light on materials.

    PROCESS SKILLS
    Observing, Communicating, Experimenting

    MATERIALS
    A piece of brightly coloured (uniform) material, pair of scissors, corn
    seeds/pigeon pea seeds, cotton wool, petri dishes/wide-mouth jar covers,
    water, shoe box with cover.

    CONTENT SUMMARY
        Both living and non-living materials can be affected by light.
        Exposure to strong light can cause some colours to fade.
        Light is needed by plants to produce chlorophyll and light energy
        and chlorophyll are needed by plants to make food.
        Some reading glasses are photosensitive/light sensitive. They
         become darker as the light gets stronger.


    SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES

       Inform students that they would be conducting a set of investigations
       aimed at observing the effects of light on materials and that some of
       these investigations would be done over an extended period of time (2
       weeks).

       1. Cut several 4-inch squares from a piece of brightly coloured
          material. Give each working group a piece of the material and let
          them place it in a selected area exposed to direct sunlight. Keep the
          rest of the material in a cupboard for later comparison. Each group
          should place their material in the sun daily for a period of about 2
          weeks. Comparisons should be made with the piece retained and
          kept away form light, at selected intervals: after 2 days, after 4
          days etc., and then at the end of the period.




                                                                             52
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Energy – K - 5


      Discuss the observed differences:

          -   How was the material placed in the sun different from the
              piece from which it was taken?
          -   What was responsible for the change?

   2. Distribute the following to each of the working groups: - two pots
      (containers) with identical seedlings.

      These instructions should be followed:
         - place one container in a dark cupboard;
         - place the other container in an area exposed to bright light;
          -   compare seedlings at the end of one week, and then two weeks.

   3. Use a pair of photo-sensitive reading glasses to demonstrate how it
      is affected by light intensity. Let students observe the colour of the
      glass within the classroom, and then outside in strong sunlight.



ASSESSMENT
1. HOME SURVEY

  Let students conduct a survey in the home to identify
  places/materials that have been affected by exposure to light
  (faded curtains, furniture, paint on walls).

  Students should also identify situations where people use the
  bleaching action of the sun.

  Reports should be presented to class.




                                                                              53
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Energy – K - 5


DURATION: 2 Lessons

OBJECTIVES
Students should be able to:

   1. Investigate the effect of heat on materials.
   2. State some effects of heat on materials.
   3. Infer that the sun’s heat helps to produce wind.

PROCESS SKILLS
Observing, Inferring

MATERIALS

Water, candle wax, plastic, nails, coin, a beaker, saw dust, heat source,
alcohol, test tube.

CONTENT SUMMARY
   Heat affects materials in the following ways:-
   - It causes liquids like water to boil.
   - It causes liquids like water to evaporate.
   - It causes some materials to melt.
   - It causes some materials to expand.
   - It causes some materials to ignite and burn.


SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES
          1. Place 50 ml-100ml water in a metal container or beaker and
             ask students to observe the water at the room temperature.
             Heat water until it begins to boil. During the time of heating
             let students observe the water and note any changes.
          2. Pour about 10ml alcohol into a test tube. Turn heat source off
             and place the test tube containing the alcohol into the hot
             water bath. (SAFETY – ALCOHOL SHOULD NOT BE USED
             WITH A NAKED FLAME!)
             Give students the opportunity to explain their observations.
          3. Place some candle wax in metal container and ask students
             to say what would happen when the container is placed over
             the heat source.
             Heat container and let students observe what
             happens. Ask students to list other materials that
             would melt upon heating.


                                                                            54
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Energy – K - 5




           4. The expansion principle may also be demonstrated using two
              nails inserted into a piece of wood and a coin.
                               o Place nails firmly into the piece of wood
                                  with a distance that would just permit the
                                  coin to pass between them
                               o Heat coin then try to pass it through
                               o The nails may also be heated instead of
                                  the coin.

        5.    Demonstrate the burning of materials such as paper, splints,
              magnesium ribbon. (Be sure to observe safety procedures and
              warn students of the dangers of children playing with fire.


      6.      Mix some saw dust with water in a temperature beaker and
              heat the beaker at one end to set up convection current.
              Let students describe what they observe. Explain that air in the
              atmosphere behaves in a similar way to water in this respect. That
              is, when one part is heated more than the other it begins to move
              in a particular direction. (This should help students to better
              understand and appreciate how land and sea breezes are caused:-
              a concept covered in “Earth’s Weather – objective 8”



ASSESSMENT
    Oral question-and-answer
      session: Possible questions
           1. What happens to water when it is heated
           2. Give some examples of other substances which would be
              affected in a similar way.
           3. In what other ways does heat affect substances?
           4. Give some examples of substances that will burn or melt or
              expand when heated.




                                                                              55
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Energy – K - 5



    DURATION:             1 Lesson

    OBJECTIVES

    Students should be able to:

       1. List examples of fuels used in the home, for transportation and for
          industrial production.
       2. Discuss some of the consequences of using these fuels.
       3. Suggest ways of reducing and controlling undesirable consequences
          of the use of fuels.



    PROCESS SKILLS
    Communicating, Researching

    MATERIALS
    Sample of charcoal, wood, gasolene, diesel, kerosene, picture of liquid
    petroleum gas LPG cylinders, pictures of equipment that use various
    types of fuels. Pictures of factories/generating plants emitting smoke.

    CONTENT SUMMARY
        A fuel is any substance/material that is burned to produce energy.
        Several kinds of fuels are used in our homes and communities to
        generate energy.
       LPG is used in some cookers to produce heat for cooking and baking.
        Kerosene is used in some stoves to produce heat for cooking.
        Gasolene and diesel are used by motor vehicles to provide the
        energy they need to travel.
        Diesel is used in generators to produce electricity.
        Charcoal and wood are used in some homes to provide heat for
        cooking and baking.
        The uses of these fuels have some negative effect on the
         environment. e.g. pollution of the air, oil spills on the oceans,
        cutting down of trees etc.
        (Optional) The green–house effect is one of the ill–effects of the
        use of these fuels. Acid rain is another.
        Explain the green-house effect in simple terms(Note: Just an
         awareness is required).
        Heavy air pollution causes respiratory problems.
        Reducing our use of these fuels can help to reduce the ill effects.


                                                                                56
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Energy – K - 5




    SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES
        Display pictures of various pieces of equipment that use the different
        fuels. Let students identify each and state their various uses.
        Next, let students specify the source of energy (what fuel is used)
        in each case.
        Display pictures of smoking industrial plants and vehicles and use
         them as stimulus material for a discussion on the ill effects
        (pollution) caused by the use of these fuels.
        Lead discussion on ways in which we can reduce our dependence
         on these fuels.




    ASSESSMENT & FOLLOW – UP
       1. A written exercise :

          Use the words in the list to complete the table below:
              Gasolene, coals, diesel, LPG (gas), kerosene

          Equipment                Fuel Used
          Gas cooker
          Bus
          Coal pot
          Car
          Factory(emitting
          smoke)
          Aeroplane
          Bulldozer
          Motorbicycle
          Candle
          Kerosene lamp

       2. Which of these problems are caused by the use of fuels such as
          coal, wood and gasolene?

              A. floods
              B. acid rain
              C. the greenhouse effect
              D. water shortage/drought
              E. respiratory diseases




                                                                                  57
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Energy – K - 5


   3. (Optional) Let students do some research on the green-house
      effect and acid rain. What are they? How do they affect us? What
      causes them? What can we do about them?
      Students make oral presentations.




                                                                    58
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Energy – K - 5



    DURATION:            I Lesson

    OBJECTIVES
    Students should be able to:

       1. Trace the flow of energy through a food chain.
       2. Infer that the sun provides the energy needed by all living organisms.

    PROCESS SKILLS
    Communicating, Inferring

    MATERIALS
    Pictures of various animals and humans feeding. A video clip can be
    used alternatively.

    CONTENT SUMMARY
        All living things need energy to carry out their activities. This energy is
        obtained from the food they make(plants) or eat (animals).
        Plants use light energy from the sun to make the substances they
         need to grow and carry out the activities. The process by which this
        is done is photosynthesis.
        Some animals eat plant materials to obtain the substances they
         need to grow and carry out their activities. These animals are called
        herbivores.
        Some animals feed on the flesh or products of other animals from
         which they obtain the substances they need to grow and carry out
        their activities. These animals are called carnivores.
        The sun is the source of all energy available to living organisms.

    SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES
       1. Display picture chart/show video clip of animals feeding and use
          this to stimulate class discussion. Guiding questions:

                        What are these animals doing?
                        Why do they need to feed/eat?
                        What do they get from the food?

                        Why do we need energy?




                                                                                       59
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Energy – K - 5


   2. Ask students to list the things they had for lunch/breakfast/(or
      which they normally eat). Make list on board. Challenge students to
      determine the origin of bread, meat, etc. (The idea here is to show
      that plants are the source).


ASSESSMENT
    Let students construct flow charts (food chains) consisting of at
     least three stages to show how food passes from one organism to
     another, beginning with plants. They can either write the words or
     draw diagrams.




                                                                      60
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Energy – K - 5


    DURATION:                  1 Lesson

    OBJECTIVES
    Students should be able to:

       1. List other forms of energy apart from heat and light.
       2. Infer that energy can be changed from one form to another.
       3. Give simple examples of energy transformation.
       4. List devices/appliances that are energy changers.

    PROCESS SKILLS
    Inferring, Observing

    MATERIALS
    Pictures depicting various forms of energy, a lighted bulb, electrical iron,
    radio (battery operated), electrical fan, flashlight, spring, rubber band,
    food samples

    CONTENT SUMMARY
        There are other forms of energy apart from heat and light. These
         include energy stored in foods and batteries (chemical energy); the
         energy moving objects possess (kinetic energy); the energy
         contained in a stretched spring or piece of rubber (potential
        energy); sound energy and electrical energy.
        Energy can be changed from one form to another. For example,
         chemical energy in a dry cell (battery) can be changed to electrical
         energy, which is then changed to heat and/or light energy.
       Chemical              Electrical           Heat + Light



    SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES:
     (This must be kept very simple. Students may not know the terms for
    the form of energy e.g. chemical. They can use “energy in batteries” to
    “light “ for example.)

       1. Display a few devices, which produce heat and light energy and ask
          students to state what form of energy each produces.
          Ask if anyone knows of any other form of energy apart from heat and
          light. List them and complete list. Solicit and offer simple explanation of
          each type using pictures or actual objects as reinforcement.




                                                                                  61
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Energy – K - 5


   2. Display a number of devices (radio, flashlight, fan, etc.) and
      challenge students to figure out how each of the devices is able to
      produce the form of energy it does.
      For example: - How is a flashlight able to produce light?
                   : - How is radio able to produce sound?
                   : - How is an electrical iron able to produce heat?
                   : - How are our bodies able to produce heat?
                   : - How is the fan able to produce motion
                      (kinetic energy):

      Record students’ explanations in the form of flow
      charts: - e.g. flash light

                       Chemical                  Electrical        Light
                       Energy                    Energy            Energy


      Once this is done ask students to write down a concluding
      statement about energy, based on what was observed. (Energy can
      be changed from one form to another).

ASSESSMENT
    Display pictures and ask students to either explain orally or draw
     flow charts to depict the energy transformation.
    Alternatively, students could be presented with a work sheet on
     which the transformation is to be written.




                                                                          62
        Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Energy – K - 5


        WORK SHEET



EQUIPMENT/OBJECT
                                                ENERGY CHANGES
(Use pictures instead)
Flashlight showing light




Radio




Coal pot with burning coals




A moving vehicle




                                                                       63
       Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Energy – K - 5




An athlete on the run

           1. Challenge students to design and make a simple device that is able
              to change energy from one form to another (sling shot, cotton reel
              carts, etc.)




                                                                              64
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Energy – K - 5


DURATION: 2 Lesson

OBJECTIVES
Students should be able to:

   1. Investigate how specific forms of technology have changed over time.
   2. Draw a time line/flow chart to show how a specific form of
      technology has changed over time.
   3. Suggest reasons for the improvements observed.

PROCESS SKILLS
Communicating

MATERIALS

Pictures of radio, refrigerator or motor car.

CONTENT SUMMARY

    Human beings are constantly seeking ways of improving
     technological devices to make them more efficient.

SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES
   1. Divide students into working groups and give to each group one
      form of technology (motor vehicle, televisions, irons, cookers,
      radios, etc.). Instruct groups to conduct research into the
      development of each form.
      Guiding Questions: -
   - When was it first invented?
   - Who invented it?
   - What did the earlier ones look like?
   - How different are they today?
   - What are some advantages of newer models over the older? What
      are some disadvantages of the new models?
   - Projects could be presented in the form of a time chart of pictures.

ASSESSMENT
   1. Students could be graded for their group effort, the time chart and
      their presentation.

      Criteria:


                                                                             65
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Energy – K - 5



             Amount of information                             10 points
             Presentation/Arrangement/Organization             10 points
             Effort                                             5 points




                                                                           66
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Energy – K - 5


    DURATION:                  1 Lesson

    OBJECTIVES
    Students should be able to:

       1. Develop a set of questions that can be used to compare devices
          used to provide heat or light.
       2. State at least one advantage and one disadvantage of each of the
          devices.

    PROCESS SKILLS
    Observing, Recording, Reporting

    MATERIALS
    Coal pot, iron/electrical iron, filament bulb/fluorescent bulb, small pocket
    light/large flashlight, etc.

    CONTENT SUMMARY
        Some forms of technology are easier and/or better to use than
        others made for the same purpose.
        There are advantages and disadvantages in using technology, for
        example:
            o Some use more energy than others and are therefore more
              expensive to operate.
            o Some pollute the atmosphere more than others.

    SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES
       1. Organize working groups and give to each group a pair of devices
          (performing similar function) and ask students to determine how
          well they do what they are made to do. Ask students to write down
          the questions they will ask someone in order to determine which
          technology is better.
       2. Ask students to list at least one advantage/disadvantage of one
          technology over the other.

    ASSESSMENT
       1. Students’ work from the activities should be used for assessing
          performance.
Unit:       structure and function (grade 4)

Topic:      Growth and Development in Plants
            and Animals

Duration: 15 Lessons (30 minutes each)

Objectives

Students should be able to:

   1. State the conditions necessary for germination in plants.
   2. Observe and describe the stages in the process of growth in plants.
   3. Discuss the importance of growth, development and
      reproduction in plants and animals.
   4. State the various ways in which technology is utilized in growth
      and propagation in plants.
   5. Describe the external structure of animals.
   6. Relate the features of these structures to their function.

Process Skills
Observing
Measuring
Communicating
Inferring

Content Summary

Conditions necessary for germination are suitable
temperature/warmth, air/oxygen, moisture/water.

Stages in the process of growth:

Seed Takes in water and becomes swollen and soft
     Young root (radicle) emerges and grows down
     Young shoot (plumule) emerges and grows up
     Cotyledons (food store) decrease in size as food is used up

Seedling    Young shoot elongates and develops new leaves
            Root system extends and roots become more numerous,
            more branched and longer

Mature plant stem increases in rigidity, branches develop


                                                                            32
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Structure and Function – K - 6


             Leaves increase in size and numbers
             Root system becomes fully developed
             Flowers are produced

Growth and development in plants is a continuous process. Growth
ensures the replacement of plant parts. (e.g. leaves and branches and
storage organs and fruits).
Growth and development are essential to complete the life cycle of plants.
Reproduction continues throughout the life of a mature plant.
Reproduction is important for the production of new plants.

Technology is utilized in several ways in enhancing growth and
propagation of plants.

  Addition of fertilizers Increase in size of parts (fruits, leaves, plant size)
  Greenhouses             Ensure year-round supply of seasonal plants and
                            fruits
                            Allow for plant growth in otherwise unfavourable
                            conditions
  Grafting                Produces new and improved varieties
                            Maintains quality control
                            Increases yield of plant
  Pruning                 Reduces or eliminates parts and improves food
                            production
  Tissue culture          Increases volume and reduces growth time
                            Controls undesirable traits
                            Conserves food since less of the storage organs are
                            used up to produce new plants
  Creating hybrids        Produce new varieties of greater yield and that are
                            disease resistant
  Irrigation              Provide suitable growth conditions in otherwise
                            unsuitable areas
  Mechanization           Ploughing to increase aeration of soil
 Addition of plant
   growth hormones          Speeds up growth and development of plants


External structures in animals

N.B. Objectives 5 & 6 deal with external features of animals that pertain to
movement, response and feeding as the body parts/organs/tissues involved in
other life processes are for the most part not visible externally.

Structures in Mammals (Humans)

   Limbs    long; provide points for muscle attachment to bring about
             movement. The longer the bones, the greater the degree of
             movement.


                                                                                33
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Structure and Function – K - 6


       Feet     Flat; enhances balance and is the area of contact with surface.
       Eyes     Transparent at the front to allow light to pass through.
       Ears     Pinna/ear lobe traps sound waves and directs them internally.
       Nose     Lined with hairs to trap particles; openings allow for entry and
                  emission of air.
                  Position of nose – aligned parallel to body. This prevents easy
                  entry of foreign objects.
     Skin       Continuous layer over entire body. It serves as a barrier
                  between organism and its environment. It allows for direct
                  contact of body with the surroundings. This allows for quick
                  detection and response. (Heat and force).
     Mouth      Opens and closes to allow for intake of food. Contains teeth.
     Teeth      Bite and crush food; physically break down food.


    Structures in Birds

     Wings   Modified for flight.
     Feathers Light to allow for easy movement.
      Beak   Various shapes and sizes. (Shape of beak and size of beak
               depend on diet).
      Legs   With claws for gripping. Claws may be webbed for swimming.
               Length of leg on depends where the bird lives and how it feeds.

      Eyes      Position depends on feeding habits and reaction time and the
                  need to respond to events in the environment. (Compare the
                  hawk and the pigeon).



    Structures in Fish

      Scales   Outer body covering; overlapping and waterproof. Provides
                 protection against predators and environmental conditions.
      Eyes     Positioned so as to allow for wide field of vision and quick
                 response. Lidless. Flat and horny to avoid damage by objects
                 in the water.
      Tail and For movement in water and for balance.
        fins
      Mouth    Open and close – allow for intake of food and water.




    Structures in Reptiles

        Scales Outer body covering for protection against predators and
         environmental conditions.


                                                                                   34
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Structure and Function – K - 6


       LimbsWith claws for gripping.
       ClawsWith sticky pads for clinging to surfaces.
       Tail For balance and defence.
       FangsPresent in some reptiles for defence and seizure of prey.
       ShellPresent in reptiles such as turtles and tortoises – provides
              additional protection.
     Mouth  Can open wide with teeth and tongue.
     Tongue Broad and sticky for easy capture of prey.
     Eyes   Positioned to allow for wide field of vision.

    Structures in Amphibians (Frogs and Toads)

     Limbs     Hind limbs longer, more developed and larger than front
                 limbs – modified for jumping.
     Eyes      Positioned high on head providing wide field of vision to allow
                 for quick detection of movement.
     Mouth     Very wide with a long sticky tongue attached to front lower jaw;
                 allows for quick capture of food.
     Germination is the process in which a seed starts to develop into a
      young plant or seedling.
     The three main conditions for germination are air, moisture and a
      suitable temperature.
     A seedling undergoes changes and grows and develops into a mature
      seed bearing plant.
     Animals also undergo changes in size, mass and physical appearance
      as they mature into adults.
     Growth and development are important processes in the lives of plants
      and animals.
     Technology is being used in various ways to influence growth and
      development in plants. In all instances it is always for Man’s benefit.
     There are a wide variety of physical structures among the five classes
      of vertebrates.
     These differences are related to differences in habitat, feeding habits
       and their types of movement.


    Activities

         Plants
          Teacher and students may set up experiments to investigate the
           conditions necessary for germination.
          Let students observe plant growth over an extended period of time
           e.g. wet and dry seasons.
          Let students observe growth in plants with short life cycles e.g.
           beans, corn, balms, ochroes, sunflower, daisies.
          Let students observe a plant, e.g. coconut or corn, at various
            stages of development.



                                                                                   35
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Structure and Function – K - 6


           Observe several different plants in nature at different stages of
            development. For each plant let students note differences in
            changes in size of parts, e.g. size of stem, presence or absence of
            flowers and fruits. Record observations and infer the importance of
           growth and development of a plant.
          Visit a farm to observe plants at different stages of development.
           Visit a market to identify different produce/items. Let students
            identify the source of these items.
           Visit to an agricultural/experimentation station and/or botanical
            gardens to observe plants and animals at different stages of
           development.
           Let students search to obtain information on growth and
           development in selected plants.
           Interview farmers/Agricultural officers/Forestry officers to obtain
            information on selected plants.

    Animals

       Outdoor visits- school yard/farm/zoo/ rivers/ponds (places where
       animals can be found) for students to observe variety of animals.
       Let students record physical appearance and note external structures
       and let them state the functions of the structures observed.
      Have discussions to relate structure to function.
       Interview personnel on visits so as to obtain information on external
        features and their significance.
       Let students collect photographs/pictures of animals and have class
       discussions on prominent external features.
       Let students view videos/television programmes on animals looking at
       external features
       Let students search to obtain relevant information on external
       structures of selected animals.
       Storytelling/Poetry reading looking at animals.

    Assessment

       Case Studies e.g. Let students observe an animal (e.g. parrot, lizard,
        frog, fish). Let students record observations. Let students relate
       observed structures to function in the animal.
      Short descriptive paragraphs on named animals.
      Poetry writing on chosen animals.
      Written report on visits made or interviews conducted.
      Record observations using drawings.
      Completion type items.
      Matching items e.g. matching body part to named animals.
       Sequencing diagrams of a germinating seedling in the correct order.

    Unit:        ecosystems (grade 4)

    Topic: Ecosystems (Local)

    Duration: 4 Lessons
Specific Objectives

Students should be able to:

OOO.   Investigate the characteristics of mangrove swamps, rainforests,
  ponds, etc.

PPP.    Explain the importance of mangrove swamps, rainforests and
   ponds.

QQQ.     Construct a model of an environment (habitat).

Process Skills
Observing, Investigating, Communicating, Constructing

Materials
Play dough/plasticine
Cardboard

Content summary
There are various ecosystems in your country. They may include,
river/pond, mangrove, rain forests. The existing ecosystems of a country
have important resources that people depend on for food, clothing and
other things.

Suggested Activities
Ø Go on field trip to see different ecosystems (mangrove, rainforest,
  pond). Record findings on a given worksheet.

Ø Discuss the importance of these ecosystems (to animals, humans, the
  economy, etc.).

Ø Build or paint a mangrove model/mural in groups. (You may choose
  another ecosystem.)


                                                                        69
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Ecosystems – K - 6



Assessment
Ø Completed worksheet of field trip discoveries.

Ø Grade model/mural.

Ø Write a poem that tells the importance of a specified ecosystem.




                                                                     70
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Ecosystems – K - 6


Topic: Local and Regional Ecosystems:
          Distribution and Location

Duration: 4 Lessons

Specific Objectives

Students should be able to:

Ø Explain the links between landform and type of ecosystems.

Ø Discuss how ecosystems contribute to social and economic
  development (-e.g. fish, ecotourism, etc.

Ø Name the different types of ecosystems found in your country and
  indicate their location on a map.

Ø Investigate the characteristics and importance of ecosystems in the
  OECS/Caribbean region (other than own country).

Ø Name the main types of Caribbean ecosystems.

Ø Identify the countries in which specific ecosystems are located.

Ø Indicate the Distribution/location of some regional ecosystems
  (hilly/wet/rainforest) on a map of given countries.

Ø Explain how ecosystems provide useful resources.

Process Skills
Observing, Inferring, Manipulating, Communicating, Investigating, Reporting.

Materials
Relief map (your island/country)
Charts (different types of ecosystems)
Crayons/pencils
Video (documentary on Caribbean ecosystems)
Map/maps of Caribbean territories




                                                                               71
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Ecosystems – K - 6


Content summary
The distribution and location of local and regional ecosystems are many
and varied. They include rainforests, wetlands and hilly/mountainous areas.
The existence of ecosystems benefits our countries in a number of ways, such as
for recreation, food and tourist attractions.

Suggested Activities
Ø Go on island tour to investigate different types of ecosystems on the
  island. Take note of their distribution.

Ø Engage in follow-up discussion of the following:
          types and location of ecosystems
          links between landformsand ecosystems
          the importance of ecosystems to development.

Ø Identify the location of different types of ecosystems displayed on a map.

Ø View documentary video showing ecosystems found in various countries.


Assessment
Ø Indicate the location of different types of ecosystems on an outline
  map, using a specified set of legends. (keys)

Ø Make models to/represent/simulate named ecosystems.


Ø Develop chart/table indicating the existence of different ecosystems
  by country.

Ø Make oral/written presentation on the benefits of ecosystems to
  different countries.




                                                                               72
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Ecosystems – K - 6


Topic: Environmental Destruction

Duration: 3 Lessonss

Specific Objectives

Students should be able to:

Ø Identify ways in which humans interact with the environment.

Ø Investigate the effect of wave action on the environment (e.g. beach,
  coral reefs.)

Materials
Pictures/videos (coastal features)
Worksheets (Puzzle)

Content summary
Environmental destruction is the upsetting of the balance of nature. The balance
in nature can be destroyed by natural processes, such as hurricanes,
earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, droughts and floods. The balance may
also be disturbed by activities of humans. Pollution of air and water resources,
deforestation and excavations of portions of the earth are some of the ways
in which human, destroy the environment.

Suggested Activities
3. Observe the immediate environment and identify areas that have been
   destroyed. Discuss how people activities contributed to the destruction.

4. Go on field trip to coastal area (beach, mangrove swamp, etc.).
   Observe the environment: litter, erosion, depletion of sand, etc.

5. Write a report on the destruction caused to the environment by
   humans. Suggest ways in which humans may prevent destruction of
   the environment.

6. Examine picture/view documentary of coastal features formed by waves.




                                                                              73
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Ecosystems – K - 6


Assessment
Ø Graded reports (after field trips).

Ø Design posters to be used in a campaign against environmental
  destruction by man.

Ø Worksheet: match key concepts to their meaning (use a puzzle).




                                                                   74
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Ecosystems – K - 6




Grade 4: Environmental Destruction – for Suggested Assessment No. 3

                                                                   75
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Ecosystems – K - 6


Topic: Conservation Needs (Your country)

Duration: 3 Lessons

Specific Objectives

Students should be able to:

Ø Appreciate that the environment needs to be protected.

Ø Investigate conservation needs of countries (focus on terrestrial).

Ø Identify ways of conserving the environment.

Process skills
Communicating, Creating, Experimenting, Manipulating, Constructing,
Communicating

Materials
Plants/trees
Vegetable peelings (for compost)
Plot of fenced land (to build compost)
Resource person (from environment/solid waste management department)
Soil in shallow container (for soil erosion experiment)
Water
Watering can (to simulate rain)

Content Summary
The wise use of our natural resources is called conservation. It is important
to practise conservation of our resources in order to save the environment.
Conservation methods include reducing waste, recycling and reusing
resources as far as possible. Practising conservation can bring positive results to
the environment. One method of reducing waste, while at the same time
recycling useful materials, is composting. Compost is a soil conditioner and
fertilizer, and is the product of the decomposition of animal and plant matter. It
is used by gardeners to replenish the humus in soil.




                                                                                76
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Ecosystems – K - 6


Suggested Activities
Students will do the following:

2. Hold discussion with resource person from the solid waste
   management authority in the area. Write a report on what they have
   learnt about managing solid waste.

3. Build/construct a compost heap.

4. Art project: Use old and discarded items to create a useful artefact.

5. Write a petition to your parliamentary representative, requesting
   protection for the terrestrial environment.

6. Tree planting exercise.

7. Write a poem/song about the importance of terrestrial conservation.

8. Carry out an experiment to demonstrate soil erosion.

9. Carry out a clean-up campaign.

Assessment
4. Teacher-made Test

5. Letter/poem/projects

6. Grade reports on solid waste management.
Unit: DIVERSITY AND CLASSIFICATION (grade 4)


Topic: Producing Plants from Different Seeds

Duration: 4 Lessons

Objectives:

Students should be able to:

1. Identify seeds as a means of reproducing different plants.

2. Define sexual reproduction.

3. Link the seed to sexual reproduction in plants.

4. Define germination.

5. List the factors needed for germination to occur.

6. Describe the processes of germination in plants.

7. Compare the rate of germination in a variety of seeds.



Process Skills:
Observing, Communicating, Investigating, Manipulating

Materials
Seeds
Water
Containers
Centimetre squares graph paper
Observation schedules (worksheet)

Content summary
Plants reproduce either sexually and/or asexually. In sexual
reproduction new plants are grown from seeds. Asexual reproduction
does not require seeds as new plants are grown from plant parts.


                                                                     51
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Diversif ication & Classification – K - 6


A seed consists of an embryo and its food reserves, enclosed in a protective
coat. Under suitable conditions, the seed produces a small plant. This small
plantis referred to as a seedling. A seedling can grow into a mature plant.



Activities
1. Field trip to a farm/nursery.

2. Discuss the importance of seeds for obtaining new plants.

3. Work in groups to set up experiments in which plants are grown from
   different seeds (for at least one week). Record the results in a daily
   observation schedule (see activity sheet in Figure 1): record the
   changes that take place in each seed; observe when roots and shoots
   appear; measure and record their length daily, plot a graph of length
   of plant (X axis) or number of leaves against (Y axis) time (in days).
   Compare the graphs to see which seed grow fastest.

4. Discuss: i. the meaning of germination;

              ii. the advantages and disadvantages of growing

              plants from seeds (sexual reproduction).


Assessment

1. Give the meaning of (i.) Seed (ii.) Germination

2. List the factors that are needed for a seed to germinate.
3. State two advantages and two disadvantages of sexual reproduction in
   plants. Write your answers in the table below.


                     Advantages                      Disadvantages




4. ‘Show and tell’ about the different plants that they have grown, and
   then submitt their observation schedules to be graded.

5. Grade graph of plant growth over one week.




                                                                                          52
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Diversif ication & Classification – K - 6


Work Sheet: Observing Germination
Date:                                ________Class:__________________

Names of group members:
………………………………
………………………………
………………………………
………………………………
………………………………

                                     Instructions

      Set up seeds in the containers provided. Grow the plants either in
water or on moist tissue paper, so that all of the parts can be seen as
they grow. Observe the changes for at least 7 days. Record your
observations in the table below.

                   Day                           Changes that have occurred

                  Day 1


                  Day 2


                  Day 3


                  Day 4


                  Day 5


                  Day 6


                  Day 7


Figure 1: Observation schedule for activity 3




                                                                                          53
UNIT:                 THE EARTH’S WEATHER (GRADE 4)

DURATION: 2 Lessons


OBJECTIVES
Students should be able to:
Ø      Demonstrate how clouds are formed.
Ø      Describe how clouds are formed.


PROCESS SKILLS
Communicating
Inquiry
Observing
Exploring
Investigating


TEACHING STRATEGIES
Discussion
Role playing
Demonstration
Pictorial representation
Inquiry learning
Discovery learning
Question and Answer


MATERIALS
Activity 1: Making cloud pictures:
    2. White water soluble paint
    3. Blue paper
    4. Paint brushes
    3. Cotton balls


                                                      66
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Weather – K – 4


       Ø Feathers
       2. Glue


    CONTENT SUMMARY
        Clouds help us to forecast weather. Evaporation changes liquid
          water to water vapour as the large area of warm, moist air rises. It
          expands and cools. The water vapour condenses into tiny droplets of
          water. The droplets come together to form clouds.


       Clouds are grouped by their height above the ground. Some clouds are close to

       the ground, some are high in the atmosphere, and some are in between.


    Clouds and Weather
        When water particles in clouds become too heavy to remain suspended
          in the air, they fall to the earth as rain.



    SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES
    1) Making cloud pictures:
    Let students use paint, blue paper, brushes, cotton balls and feathers to
    make pictures showing different types of clouds.


    2) Kinds of Clouds:
    Are there different types of clouds in the sky?
    Observe clouds in the sky; draw illustrations of the different types of clouds.


    Compare and discuss findings with other members of the class in
    relation to:
        How many different cloud shapes did you see? Did any of the clouds
          change shape?
        What colours were the clouds?

        Explain how you grouped clouds.



                                                                                   67
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Weather – K – 4


Journal writing:
Ø   The Weather:
          Give each student a table similar to the one below.
          Put in the month at the top.
          Draw a picture of the main type of cloud in the sky and state
          the type of weather present each day.




                                                                          68
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Weather – K – 4


Month:
Sunday      Monday      Tuesday      Wednesday     Thursday     Friday   Saturday
Cloud       Cloud       Cloud        Cloud         Cloud        Cloud    Cloud




Weather     Weather     Weather      Weather       Weather      Weather Weather




Cloud       Cloud       Cloud        Cloud         Cloud        Cloud    Cloud




Weather     Weather     Weather      Weather       Weather      Weather Weather




Cloud       Cloud       Cloud        Cloud         Cloud        Cloud    Cloud




Weather     Weather     Weather      Weather       Weather      Weather Weather




Cloud       Cloud       Cloud        Cloud         Cloud        Cloud    Cloud




Weather     Weather     Weather      Weather       Weather      Weather Weather




                                                                                 69
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Weather – K – 4




ASSESSMENT
Sample questions:


2. Look at the pictures below and do the following: Describe in your own
     words the clouds that you see.




A __________________         B ___________________              C____________


3. Clouds are formed by:
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________


4.    You are going on a picnic when you notice that the sky is filled with a
      layer of grey clouds. Should you go to the picnic or should you stay
      inside? Explain.
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________




                                                                                70
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Weather – K – 4


    TEMPERATURE
    DURATION: 3 Lessons
    OBJECTIVES
    The students should be able to:
    Ø      Use a thermometer to measure temperature.
    Ø      Design and construct a working thermometer.
    Ø      Explain how temperature affects weather (evaporation, condensation,
           and air movement).Cross reference – Energy.


    PROCESS SKILLS
    Observing
    Communicating


    TEACHING STRATEGIES
    Question and Answer
    Co-operative learning
    Experimenting


    MATERIALS
    Activity #1: Measuring temperature
         Thermometer

    Activity # 2: Formation of wind

         Aquarium

         Clamp lamp

         100 watt light bulb

         Ice

         Splint or paper

         Matches

         Plastic wrap



                                                                                 71
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Weather – K – 4


    CONTENT SUMMARY
    Temperature is another factor which affects weather.
        Temperature means how hot or cold something is. How can we tell
          the temperature of the air around us?


        What instrument does your mother or the nurse/doctor use when you
          have a fever? A thermometer is used to measure temperature.

                                                     o     o
        The unit for measuring temperature is C or F, although degrees
          Celsius° is more commonly used.


    The simple mercury or alcohol thermometer:
        The thermometer is made from a glass bulb connected to a tube of
          glass with a numbered scale written on the outside. There is a narrow
          tube running from the bulb to the top of the thermometer; this is
          called the capillary tube.

          The bulb contains mercury, which is a liquid metal (or alcohol, often

          dyed red so that it is visible). The mercury/alcohol inside the
          thermometer rises when heat is applied;




                        Figure A Thermometer




                                                                                  72
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Weather – K – 4


    SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES
    Reading a thermometer


             When you read the temperature on a thermometer, it should be vertical
          and your eyes should be level with the top of the liquid in the glass.

          Remember: The temperature reading is taken from the top of
          the column of mercury or alcohol.




       10 C                            15 C                         29 C


    Figure Thermometer Readings


          To measure the temperature of hot water, put the thermometer into the
          container of water. The mercury/alcohol will begin to rise up the capillary
          tube. When the mercury/alcohol stops rising, then read the temperature.


          In cold water, on the other hand, the mercury/alcohol will not rise. The
          mercury/alcohol will go down. However, the reading would be taken



                                                                                       73
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Weather – K – 4


            again, from the top of the column of mercury/alcohol. Would the
            temperature be high or low?


            To measure the temperature of the air in the laboratory or in your
            classroom, wave the thermometer gently in the air.


    Temperature affects the weather.
                   Whether we stay home or go to the beach or river depends
               on how hot or cool it is. How do you feel on a hot day? Do you
               prefer to stay indoors or go outside to play?

                   You will notice that you sweat very much on a hot day.
               However, this sweat on your skin will evaporate quickly.

                   Air Movement

            Wind is moving air. The Sun shines through our atmosphere all of the
            time. It heats the ground which in turn heats the air. Some places
            receive more than others. Hot air is light and rises. Cool air is heavier
            and sinks. As warm air rises, air from cooler areas flows in to take the
            place of the heated air that has risen. This movement of air is wind.


    Ø Measuring temperature


    Instructions:
       3.      Give each student a thermometer or use a set of thermometers for
               the class.
       4.      Let students read the temperature of the classroom and record
               their findings in their notebooks.
       5.      Go into the hallway and let students read and record the temperature.

       6.      Go outside. Let students read their thermometers and write down
               readings.
       7.      Let students hold the thermometer in their hands for a few
               minutes. Let students read and record their readings.
               Let students discuss their readings.



                                                                                       74
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Weather – K – 4


Safety Precautions
Handle the thermometer with care. Alcohol thermometers are preferable.


Activity 3: Exploring wind

Demonstration:

Instructions: Use materials for Activity #3.

Tell students that the demonstration shows how temperature affects wind
formation. The demonstration is like the way wind is produced on Earth. As
they observe this demonstration, let students look for evidence of wind.

Insert a 100 watt bulb into the lamp socket. Set up the clamp lamp so that
the light shines down on one end of the aquarium.

Place the bowl of ice at the other end of the aquarium and cover the
aquarium with plastic wrap.

Make a small amount of smoke by lighting the end of a splint or paper.
Let it burn for a few moments and then blow it out.

Puncture a hole in the plastic wrap with the lit splint near the bowl of ice.
Describe what happens to the smoke.




                                                                                75
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Weather – K – 4


ASSESSMENT
Sample questions

   2.     What does the word, temperature mean?
   3.     What is the name of the instrument used to measure heat?
                                      o
   4.     Read the temperature, in C, on a thermometer.
   Inquiry skills

   Teacher can also assess students’ observations and interpretation of the
   demonstration of how wind is formed.




                                                                              76
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Weather – K – 4


DURATION:


OBJECTIVES:
The students should be able to:


   1. Record weather using standard symbols.
   2. Summarize and represent data from their recordings of the weather
      by using simple graphs.
   3. Distinguish between weather conditions by examining weather charts.


PROCESS SKILLS
Observing
Classifying
Measuring
Communicating
Inferring
Recording and Interpreting


TEACHING STRATEGIES
Question and answer exercises
Pictorial demonstration
Co-operative learning
Experimenting




MATERIALS
Observing weather conditions:
Materials: thermometer, weather symbols, crayons, pair of scissors, glue,
copy of simplified Beaufort Scale, Science notebook




                                                                            77
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Weather – K – 4


CONTENT SUMMARY

Weather charts

Weather charts use a set of meteorological symbols to show wind, rain,
temperature and other weather conditions.
Below are some of the symbols that students may use to show different
weather conditions.




                                                       Sunny


                                                       Rainy




                                      Figure       Weather Symbols




SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES

Activity 1: Observing weather conditions


Instructions:
   1. Look at the sky. Record whether it is sunny or cloudy.
   2. Measure and record the temperature.
   3. Look for signs of wind blowing. Record what the wind is doing to
      leaves, flags, or trees.


                                                                         78
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Weather – K – 4


   4. Look for rain. Record what you see.
   5. Repeat steps 1 to 4 each day for one week.
   6. How did the weather change?
Source: Discovery Works.(2003). Houghton Mifflin: U. S. A.



Safety Precautions:
If using a mercury thermometer, remember that the mercury is poisonous,
so students must be careful that they do not let the thermometer fall.

    Students should exercise care when using pair of scissors and pushpins.

    Students should be warned not to look directly at the sun.

    Students should not sniff glue.

Journal writing:
Recording weather:
Let students use the worksheet below to record weather for a month. Put up a chart
with the weather symbols in the classroom. Let students record the weather by
drawing the appropriate symbols to show the weather for each day.




At the end of the month give a short description of the weather week by week.
Sunday    Monday      Tuesday    Wednesday       Thursday       Friday   Saturday




                                                                                79
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Weather – K – 4


Let students draw bar graphs to show conditions like cloudiness,
temperature, etc. for specific periods in the month.

ASSESSMENT

1. These symbols show us what the weather is like.




Here are the weather records for two days.




(a) Which day was
sunnier? (1 mark)
(b) Which day was
wetter? (1 mark)



                                                                   80
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Weather – K – 4


(c) Which day, do you think, had the better weather?
Why? (2marks)
2. Give students maps of different islands with weather symbols in different
   areas. Ask them to say what the weather is at different locations.




3. Below is a weather chart.




(a) Which day was the cloudiest?
(b) On which day do you think children did not play outside?




Adapted from: Bailey, A., Douglas,O. & Walker, E. (1994). England:
     Longman Group Limited



Sample answers:
   1. (a) Day 1
      (b) Day 2




                                                                               81
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Weather – K – 4




References

(http://www.doc.mmu.ac.uk)

Badders, William. et al (2003). Houghton Mifflin Science Discovery Works –
Weather and climate. Teacher’s Guide. USA: Houghton Mifflin Company.
Mitchelmore, June. (1992). Finding Out Book 1. Uk: Macmillan Caribbean.
Mitchelmore, June. (1992). Finding Out Book 3. Uk: Macmillan Caribbean.
             www.msnucleus.org/membership/html/k-6/wc/atmosphere

Mitchelmore, June, Phillips, John, and Steward, John. (2002). CXC
Integrated Science. UK: Cambridge University Press.
UNIT:        THE SOLAR SYSTEM (GRADE 4)


DURATION: 3 Lessons


OBJECTIVES

The students should be able to:


         ·   Name the planets of the solar system and place
             them in their relative position to one another.
         ·   Construct a model of the solar system.
         ·   Infer that the moon is a natural satellite to planet
             Earth.



PROCESS SKILLS
Discovery
Experimenting
Communicating
Co-operating


TEACHING STRATEGIES

Co-operative Learning
Pictorial Demonstration


MATERIALS
Activity #1: Construct a Model of the Solar System
   Pair of scissors

   Cardboard

   Crayons/Markers

   Pencil

                                                                    35
Primary Science & Techno logy Teacher Manual – Solar System – K - 4


       Blanks sheets of paper


Activity #2: Musical Chairs
   Chairs

   Cassette player/CD player

   Cassettes/CD


CONTENT SUMMARY

     The planets are Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter,
        Saturn, Uranus, Neptune and Pluto. Mercury is the closest
        planet to the Sun; it takes 88 days for Mercury to orbit the
        Sun. Pluto is the planet farthest from the Sun; it takes 248
        years for Pluto to orbit the Sun.

     The table below shows the position of the planets in relation to
        the Sun and the time it takes for each to orbit the Sun.




                                                                         36
Primary Science & Techno logy Teacher Manual – Solar System – K - 4


              TABLE SHOWING ORBITAL PERIOD FOR THE PLANETS
                              IN THE SOLAR SYSTEM

             Planet                       Time to
                                          orbit
                                          the Sun
             Mercury                      88 days
             Venus                        224 days
             Earth                        365 days
             Mars                         686 days
             Jupiter                      4332 days
             Saturn                       29.5 years
             Uranus                       84 years
             Neptune                      164 years
             Pluto                        248 years




                       Fig. 1 The Solar System




                                                                      37
Primary Science & Techno logy Teacher Manual – Solar System – K - 4



                           rd
    The Earth is the 3         planet from the Sun; it is 150 million
      kilometers away, the fifth largest and the only planet
      known to sustain life. It takes 365 ¼ days (1 yr.) for the
      Earth to revolve about the Sun.




        Fig. 2 The Earth




    The Sun is located at the centre of the solar system with
      all the planets revolving about it. The Sun supplies all the
      light and energy for the Earth and the entire solar system.
      The Sun is the largest body in the solar system. It is made
      up of gases.




          Fig. 3 The Sun




A planet is a illuminated by light from the Sun.


                                                                         38
Primary Science & Techno logy Teacher Manual – Solar System – K - 4



Satellites are celestial bodies that orbit a planet. The moon is a
satellite of the Earth. Human-made machines that orbit the
Earth or moon are also called satellites.

ACTIVITIES

Activity #1: Simulation of Solar System
Teacher let students work in groups to form a simulation of the
solar system using information about the planets and their
position in space relative to one another. Students model how
the planets revolve about the sun in different orbits.


Activity #2: Construct a Model of the Solar
System Instructions:
Students will construct a model of the Solar System. The Sun,
the planets, and many smaller objects that travel around the
sun make up the solar system.
The planets which orbit the sun are: Mercury, Venus, Earth,
Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto.
Use a drawing as a guide.

Instructions:
       1. Cut out ten circular shapes from one sheet of blank
              paper.
       2. Colour one yellow – to represent the Sun- and the others
           a different colour to represent each of the nine planets.
       3. Place another blank sheet of paper on top of cardboard.
       4. Position the shapes around the sun as shown in
          the drawing.




                                                                       39
Primary Science & Techno logy Teacher Manual – Solar System – K - 4




Activity #3: Naming the Planets - Musical Chairs
This activity may be modified using popular music.

Materials: chairs, cassette player/CD player, cassettes/CD


Instructions:
   8.       Let nine students stand in a circle in front of eight chairs.
   9.       Each student will represent a planet.
   10.      The name of each planet will be called out.
   11.      As the name of a planet is called out, the student
            representing that planet should move from his/her
            position and try to get to a vacant chair.


Activity #4: Mnemonics
         Create a mnemonic phrase to help students learn the planets in
correct order. Use names of students or let them come up with other
ideas for the mnemonic to help them to learn the names.

E.g. Marcy Vega eats mango jelly sandwiches under Nancy’s
patio.
Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune and
Pluto


Activity 4. Solar system bookmarks
Cut out strips of paper; punch a small hole at the top of each
strip of paper. Thread a few different pieces of coloured string
through the hole and tie. Draw/paint/colour pictures of the sun
and the planets on each strip.




                                                                            40
Primary Science & Techno logy Teacher Manual – Solar System – K - 4




Activity 5. Looking at Stars
Instructions:
Students should observe stars on a dark night and away from
street light/ lamp posts.
They can write down what they see (e.g. brightness of stars,
sizes of stars and how many in a particular area).


Safety Precautions
Exercise care with the pair of scissors.


ASSESSMENT

5. The planet that is closest to the sun is
      o      Earth


      o     Jupiter


      o Mercury
      o Pluto
6. The planet farthest from the sun is
      o Earth
      o Pluto
      o Uranus
      o Saturn




                                                                      41
Primary Science & Techno logy Teacher Manual – Solar System – K - 4



Teacher should assess students’ models of the solar system
using selected criteria.

Attitudes can be included as in the following checklist:




                                    CHECKLIST
Accepts
Responsibility
Shows
Self-motivation
Shares
Responsibility
Shares
information


Takes initiative
Communicates
effectively
Participates
in discussion


Listens to others
Respects      each
others opinion


Meets deadlines




                                                                      42
UNIT:         THE EARTH RESOURCES (GRADE 4)
DURATION : 5 Lessons


OBJECTIVES
Students should be able to:
5.      Classify resources as renewable or nonrenewable.
6.      Illustrate how rocks and soils are related.
7.      Classify soils as sand, clay and loam.
8.    Distinguish between various soils on the basis of physical
      properties (colour, texture, structure, components, etc.).


PROCESS SKILLS
Communicating
Inquiring


TEACHING STRATEGIES
Demonstration
Inquiry learning
Discovery learning
Question and answer


MATERIALS
Magazines with pictures of natural resources
Different types of soils (sandy soil, and clay soil, loamy soil)
Magnifying glasses
Teacher prepared work sheets
Goggles
Soil from the school garden
Jar with a cover
Water


                                                                   57
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Resources – K – 4


    CONTENT SUMMARY

    Classifying Natural Resources
            Natural resources are substances found on the earth that are
               used by people.

            The Earth’s resources are classified as renewable or
               nonrenewable.

            Renewable resources are replaced in nature and will not run out.
               Examples of renewable resources are water, sun, wind, plants.

              Nonrenewable resources cannot be replaced in a person’s
               lifetime; they will some day run out. Examples of nonrenewable
               resources are: natural gas, coal, and petroleum.

            We can even have shortages of renewable resources if we do
               not use them wisely
    Soil
        Soil is formed as a result of physical or chemical weathering of
           rocks. Rocks may be broken down physically by wind, rain and
           organisms or chemically by acid rain and oxygen in the air.


        There are three main types of soil. They are: clay, sand and loam.
           Clay soils have very small particles, the space between the
           particles are small and this traps water; these soils are usually
           waterlogged in the wet season. Sandy soils have large particles
           with large air spaces which allow water to drain through quickly
           making the soil dry. Loamy soil is excellent for plant growth
           because it has medium-sized particles with medium-sized air spaces
           that keep the right amount of water in the soil.




                                                                                58
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Resources – K – 4


The table below shows properties associated with different soil
types:


                     Sandy              Clay                 Loam
Colour               Light              Medium               Dark
Texture              Rough              Smooth               Medium
Components           Large         sand Small           clay Mixture of clay and
                     particles          particles            sand
Size of particles    Large              Small                Medium




SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES

Classifying Natural Resources


Activity 1: How are our basic Natural Resources used?
Allow students to examine picture books or magazines to find out the
names of different resources.
Allow students to survey their school grounds (or use as a homework
activity) and see how many ways we use air, water, and land. Allow
students to discuss freely. They can represent their findings in the form of
a chart.
They should also be able to conclude that air, water, and land (rocks and
soil) are three natural resources that we cannot do without.


Activity 2: Renewable and non-renewable resources
Students review the water cycle and discuss how water replaces itself in
nature.
Students identify other resources such as the sun, and the air, that will
not run out.
Students discuss how people use petroleum and where petroleum comes
from. Students consider what would happen if we used up all the
available petroleum. Would the petroleum be replaced quickly?



                                                                            59
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Resources – K – 4


Students view magazines with examples of drought and discuss water shortages
and infer that we still need to be careful with renewable resources.


Activity 3: Examining different kinds of soils


Prepare parcels of clay, sand and loam. Allow students to look at and touch the
three different types of soil. They should then examine the soils under a hand
lens. They can examine the colour, texture, structure and components.


To examine the components of loam, allow them to spread it thinly on a
sheet of paper or a paper plate and use another paper or paper plate to
separate out the different components they find.


They can then choose characteristics to classify the different components
they find in soil (e.g. living things, non living, once living, different sized
particles)


Activity 4: What type of soil is present in our schoolyard?


Half fill the bottle with soil from the school garden/yard. Continue to fill
the bottle almost completely with water. Shake until mixed thoroughly.
Allow mixture to settle overnight. Observe the layers of soil present.


The large particles that sink to the bottom are sand particles, if this layer
is much larger than the others, then you have sandy soil. If there are lots
of small particles and small amounts of large particles then you have clay
soil. If there are mostly medium sized particles with lots of material
floating on top of the water then you have a loam.




                                                                            60
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Resources – K – 4




ASSESSMENT
Sample questions
1. Fill in the blanks using the words provided:


                 Renewable           Nonrenewable


                 Clay         Sand          Loam




          a. ___________________ resources are Earth’s resources that
              are able to replace themselves.
          b. This type of soil is waterlogged _______________________

          c. This is excellent for gardening since it has medium sized air
              spaces. _______________________________
          2   The gas that we use for cooking is a _____________ resource.

          3 These are Earth’s resources that are not able to replace
              themselves. _________________.




2     Allow students to make picture cards to show how we use air, land
      and water. Challenge them to show examples of how all three are
      linked together.




                                                                             61
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Resources – K – 4


    AIR

    DURATION: 4 Lessons


    OBJECTIVES
    The students should be able to:
    7.       Observe and describe the force exerted by air.
    8.       Demonstrate that air has mass.
    9.       Infer that air exerts pressure.
    10.      Observe the effects of air on falling objects.
    11.      Design and construct an object to show how air affects the rate of fall.
    12.      Compare their designs with the designs of others.




    PROCESS SKILLS
    Observing
    Inferring
    Communicating
    Experimenting



    TEACHING STRATEGIES
    Co-operative Learning
    Experimenting
    Pictorial Demonstration


    MATERIALS
    Activity #1: Does Air Have Mass?
           Two balloons (same size)

           Length of stick (straight)/ ruler

           Strong thread



                                                                                        62
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Resources – K – 4


    Activity # 2: Investigating air pressure
        Sheets of paper

        A can of milk or juice

        A can opener
       
    Activity #3: Exploring the Effect of Air on the Rate of Fall – Group Activity
        Pen

        Sheets of paper

        Feathers



    CONTENT SUMMARY
        Air is a valuable resource.

        Air exerts pressure.

        Air offers resistance to falling objects.


    The Pressure of Air

        You have already learnt that air is made up of gases. A gas is a
            state of matter and so has mass. Air exerts a force or pressure on
            objects. We are surrounded by air, which exerts a force on us.

        Air pressure is the weight of the atmosphere, or the amount of
            ‘push’ in the air.

             Our bodies are not crushed by air pressure because we exert
            high-pressure from inside us. The air inside an empty’ plastic bottle
            balances the air outside.

    Air Pressure at Work
    Using a rubber sucker
    If you pushed a rubber sucker against a flat surface and you squeezed
    most of the air from under the sucker, you would find it hard to pull the
    sucker away from the surface, because the pressure of the trapped air
    has dropped as the air spread to fill a larger space.


                                                                               63
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Resources – K – 4




The difference in air pressure – low pressure underneath the rubber sucker, and
high pressure outside it – holds the sucker firmly against the glass. Rubber
suckers are used to hold towels, in kitchens and bathrooms.


Pouring liquids
When you punch holes in a can of evaporated milk the liquid flows freely
through one of the holes. If you had punched only one hole, would the
milk flow? Why?



Effects of Air on Falling Objects
(Cross reference – Forces, Motion and Structures)


Air resistance slows down falling objects.
The shape of the object affects the air resistance*. When leaves fall,
they float and drift because of air resistance.
   Resistance* - a force which opposes motion




SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES

4. Does Air Have
Mass? Instructions:
   A. Mark the centre of the stick/ruler.
   B. Tie a piece of thread tightly at the centre mark.
   C. Blow some air into one of the balloons and knot it. Then tie it to
      one end of the stick/ruler with a piece of thread.
   D. Do not blow the other balloon. Tie it to the other end of the
      stick/ruler.
   E. You have now made a balance. (Be sure that the balloons are tied
      tightly so that they do not shift.)



                                                                               64
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Resources – K – 4


       Now hold the balance up by the thread.
       Write down your observations.
       Explain what happens.




4. Finding out about Air Pressure
Ø Instructions:
        Hold two sheets of paper three inches apart. Then allow a student
        to blow between the two sheets.
        What happens?
        Discuss your observation.


Ø   Instructions:
       Use the opener to cut a small opening on one side of the can.
       Try pouring out the liquid. What happens?
       Cut another small hole opposite the first one.
       Try pouring the liquid. What happens?
       Explain .


3. Exploring Effect of Air on the Rate of fall of an
object Instructions:
Group 1
          One student will drop a pen and the other a sheet of paper,
          simultaneously, two metres above the floor.
          Record your observations.


Group 2
    4. Another student will drop a sheet of paper while the other will drop
       a feather, simultaneously, two metres above the floor.
    5. Record your observations.




                                                                          65
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Resources – K – 4


The groups will compare and discuss their findings.
Teacher can challenge students to use identical sheets of paper to
investigate what happens when different variables are changed e.g. the
shape of the paper, the height from which the paper is dropped, the mass
of the paper etc.


Students can then compete to design from identical size of newspaper
sheets, the slowest falling object/ the fastest falling object, etc.


Teacher asks students to think of everyday occurrences where objects are
designed to increase or decrease air resistance. For example, parachutes
are slowed down by air resistance, racing cyclists wear a special type of
helmet to reduce air resistance.


ASSESSMENT
Sample questions:


      Ø      What is the atmosphere made of?
      Ø      What do we call the pressure caused by air around us?
      Ø      Summarise the effect of air on a falling object.

Sample answers:
    8.    The atmosphere is made of a mixture of gases.
      9.     The pressure caused by the air around us is called
             atmospheric pressure.
      10.    Air slows down the motion of falling objects.




                                                                       66
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Resources – K – 4


WATER


DURATION: 2 Lessons


OBJECTIVES:
The students should be able to:


   Ø Classify substances as soluble or insoluble by their ability to
      dissolve in water.
   Ø Classify samples of water as hard and soft by their ability to form
      lather with soap.
   Ø Identify situations where water is useful because of its solvent
      properties.


PROCESS SKILLS
Observing
Communicating
Classifying
Planning and Designing
Experimenting
Inferring


TEACHING STRATEGIES
Project Approach
Guided Discovery
Experimenting (Deductive Inquiry)
Cooperative Learning




                                                                           67
    Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Resources – K – 4



    MATERIALS
    Soluble or not?

        Transparent plastic cups or other suitable containers, water

        Samples of soluble substances (salt, sugar, Kool Aid)

        Samples of insoluble substances (sand, wood chips, flour, leaves,
          chalk)

        Spoons/ spatulas.



    Hard and Soft Water

        Hard water (river, sea, or spring)

        Soft water (rain, distilled, drinking)

        Soap solution (soap without softeners. Note: it is important to
           use soap and not detergents)

        Container (beakers, plastic cups, etc.)


    CONTENT SUMMARY

        Water is an important solvent.

        Water has the ability to dissolve many substances. Substances that
          dissolve in water are soluble in water,while those that do not dissolve in
          water are insoluble in water. Sugar and Kool aid are examples of soluble
          substances in water, while sand is insoluble in water.


        Sometimes water has substances dissolved in it that make it hard.
          Hard water does not form a lather easily with soap, for example
          spring water. Soft water, like rain or distilled water, lather forms
          easily with soap.

        We use the solvent properties of water in cooking, and, in cleaning.




                                                                                 68
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Resources – K – 4




SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES
Properties of water:

Activity #1: Soluble or not?
Group work (4-5 students per group)


Procedure:
Students will:
   3. Place water into their containers.
   4. Add different substances to each container and stir.
   5. Make observations.
   6. Classify substances as soluble or insoluble.
   7. Find examples in their everyday life where solubility in water is an
      advantage/disadvantage.




Hard and Soft Water

Group work (5-6 students per group)


Materials:
Samples of hard and soft water, soap solution and container
Procedure:
Students will:
   11.    Place samples of hard and soft water into different containers.
   12.    Add equal amounts of soap solution into each container.
   13.    Shake each container for an equal amount of time.
   14.    Make observations (check for lather and how much)
   15.    State which water is hard and which is soft.




                                                                             69
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Resources – K – 4




ASSESSMENT

Ø Teacher can assess students’ practical work, for example, for
    observing, classifying, manipulation, inferring, communication, etc.



    Skills             Poor               Fair               Good          Excellent
    Observing
    Measuring
    Manipulating
    Recording
    Classifying
    Communicating
    Experimenting
    Designing
    Problem Solving
    Inferring


-   Teachers can let students compile a scrap book about the solvent
    properties of water they come across in their everyday lives.




                                                                            70
Primary Science & Technology Teacher Manual – Resources – K – 4




References:


Badders, William. etal. (2003). Houghton Mifflin Science Discovery Works
– Weather and climate. Teacher’s Guide. USA: Houghton Mifflin Company.
Mitchelmore, June. (1992). Finding Out Book 1. Uk: Macmillan Caribbean.
Mitchelmore, June. (1992). Finding Out Book 3. Uk: Macmillan Caribbean.
             www.msnucleus.org/membership/html/k-6/wc/atmosphere

Mitchelmore, June, Phillips, John, Steward, John. (2002) CXC Integrated
Science. UK: Cambridge University Press.




                                                                      71
