               Chapter 4


Grade 2 ≪ Annual Plan ≫




                 { 23 {
                                                                                   Chapter 4 { Grade 2 ≪ Annual Plan ≫

                                                          Section 4.1
                                                 Grade 2 | Term 1
Stra
nds
     Topics                   Sub Topics         Learning Outcomes                                               Lessons


                                                 1. Use a calculator, pencil and paper procedures, or
                              Use of appropriate mental strategies to investigate number concepts.
                              strategies for
                   General                                                                                        3
                              investigating
                              number concepts 2. Explain how they used selected strategy in carrying
                                                 out investigations involving number concepts.



                                                 3. Count in sequence to 100 and beyond.


                              Counting forward   4. Describe the patterns that are evident in numbers between
                              and back           1 and 100 and numbers beyond 100.

                              Counting on

                   Counting   Skip counting      5. Count by 2's, 5's, 10's, 20's, and 25's to 100 and beyond.    7




 Number Concepts
                                                 6. Count on from a given number.
                                                                                                                  2.8
                                                                                                                  wk

                              Number             7. Complete a sequence of numbers that involves counting
                              sequences          by 2's, 5's, 10's, 20's, and 25's.



                                                 8. Read numbers up to 99.
                              Reading and
                              writing numbers
                                                 9. Write numbers up to 99 in words and numerals.



                    Whole     Problem solving    10. Create and solve problems involving place value.
                                                                                                                  7
                   Numbers

                                                 11. State the place value of any digit in a two-digit number.

                              Place value
                                                 12. Represent a two-digit number in terms of a number of
                                                 tens and ones using concrete objects and diagrams.




                                                               { 24 {
4.1 { Grade 2 | Term 1


Stra
nds
     Topics                       Sub Topics        Learning Outcomes                                                    Lessons

                                                    1. Identify and describe situations in which it is appropriate to
                                                    use mental strategies, pencil and paper procedures, and a
                                 Use of             calculator to add subtract, multiply or divide whole numbers
                    General      computation                                                                              4
                                 strategies         2. Use mental strategies, pencil and paper procedures, or a
                                                    calculator as appropriate to add, subtract, multiply and divide
                                                    whole numbers.

                                                    3. Create and solve problems involving addition of whole
                                 Problem solving
                                                    numbers with total up to 99.


  Computation
                                                    4. Use several strategies to recall the basic facts for addition.          2.7
                                                                                                                               wk
                                 Basic facts
                                                    5. Explain their strategies for recalling the basic facts for
                                                    addition.
                  Addition of
                                                                                                                          12
                whole numbers                       6. Add a two-digit number to a one-digit number, without and
                                 Addition without   with regrouping, totals up to 99.
                                 and with
                                 regrouping         7. Add two two-digit numbers, without and with regrouping,
                                                    totals up to 99.

                                 Addition-related   8. Carry out addition with numerals presented in a horizontal or
                                 vocabulary         vertical format.

                                 Simple questions
                                                  1. Generate questions that may be answered through data
                                 of interest to
                                                  collection.
                                 students

                                                    2. Describe how to collect data through observation and simple
                                 Procedures for

  Statistics
                                                    interviews.
                Data Collection observation and                                                                           12 2.0
                                 interviewing       3. Identify similarities and differences between observation and         wk
                                                    interviewing.

                                                    4. Collect simple sets of data through observation and simple
                                 Collecting and     interviews.
                                 recording data
                                                    5. Use number statements to record the collected data.

                                 Faces of three-    1. Identify the faces of three-dimensional shapes.
                                 dimensional
                                                    2. Identify the two-dimensional shapes that make up the faces
                                 shapes
                                                    of three-dimensional shapes.

                                                    3. Classify three-dimensional shapes on the basis of their


  Geometry
                    Three-                          attributes, e.g., the number of faces, shape of their faces, size,       2.0
                  Dmensional Classification         function, etc.                                                        12 wk
                   Shapes
                                                     4. Describe and compare the groups formed from
                                                     their classification exercises.

                                  Cubes, cuboids, 5. Identify and name examples of cubes, cuboids, cones,
                                  cones and       cylinders, and spheres when presented in concrete or pictorial
                                  cylinders       form.



                                                                    { 25 {
                                                  Chapter 4 { Grade 2                                       ≪ Annual Plan ≫

Stra
nds
     Topics                  Sub Topics           Learning Outcomes                                                     Lessons


                                                  1. Estimate and measure lengths and heights of objects
                             Estimation and       using the metre as the unit of measure.
                             measurement of
                             length, height,
                             and distances
                 Linear      using the metre      2. Estimate and measure distances using the metre as the
                                                  unit of measure.                                                       5
               Measurement


                             Comparison of
                             linear               3. Compare two or three linear measurements using
                                                  phrases such as longer, longest, higher, highest, etc.
                             measurements


                                                  4. Estimate and measure the mass of objects using
                             Estimation and       the kilogram as the unit of measure.
                             measurement
                             of mass using
                             the kilogram         5. Describe situations in real life where the kilogram is used as a
               Mass                                                                                                      5
                                                  unit of measure and give reasons for these uses of the unit.



                             Comparison           6. Compare the masses of two or three objects using
                             of mass              phrases such as heavier, lighter, lightest, etc.


 Measurement
                                                                                                                         3.5
                                                                                                                         wk
                             Estimation and
                             measurement of       7. Estimate and measure the capacity of containers using
                             capacity using       the litre as the unit of measure.
                             the litre
               Capacity                                                                                                  4

                             Comparison           8. Compare the capacity of two or three containers using
                             of capacity          phrases such as 'holds more', 'holds the least', etc.



                             Temperature-       9. Describe the temperature of an object as warm, 'hot',
                             related vocabulary 'cold', 'tepid', etc.
               Temperature                                                                                               4

                             Comparison of        10. Compare the temperature of two or three objects using
                             temperature          phrases such as warmer, hotter, hottest, coldest, etc.



                             Selection of units   11. Select the appropriate unit to measure length, mass,
                                                  and capacity.
                 General
                                                                                                                         3
                Strategies
                                                  12. Create and solve problems involving linear measurement
                             Problem solving
                                                  and measurement of mass, capacity, and temperature.



                                                                 { 26 {
4.2 { Grade 2 | Term 2


                                                                    Section 4.2
                                                          Grade 2 | Term 2
Stra
nds
     Topics                          Sub Topics           Learning Outcomes                                                    Lessons

                       Place value                       13. State the total value of any digit in a two-digit number.




  Number Concepts
                       Expanded notation 14.                  Write two-digit numbers in expanded form.
                       Whole                                                                                                         1.0
                                                                                                                                 6
                       Numbers                           15. Compare pairs of two-digit numbers using the symbols '<'                wk
                       Comparison of                     and '>'.
                       numbers
                                                         16. Arrange a set of two-digit numbers in order of magnitude
                                                         and give reasons for the arrangement.

                                                         9. Create and solve problems involving subtraction of whole
                       Problem solving
                                                         numbers with up to two digits.

                                                         10. Use several strategies to recall the basic facts for
                                                         subtraction.
                       Basic facts
                                                          11. Explain their strategies for recalling the basic facts
                                                          for subtraction.

                                                          12. Subtract a one-digit number from a two-digit number,
                    Subtraction of Subtraction            without and with regrouping.                                           10
                    whole numbers
                                      without and with
                                     regrouping           13. Subtract a two-digit number from a two-digit number,
                                                          without and with regrouping.

                                                          14. Explain the procedures they use for addition and
                                                          subtraction, using appropriate vocabulary such as 'add', 'sum',


  Computation
                                     Subtraction-         'difference', 'minus', etc.                                                 3.5
                                     related vocabulary
                                                          15. Carry out subtraction with numerals presented in a                      wk
                                                          horizontal or vertical format.

                                     Problem solving      16. Create and solve simple problems involving multiplication.

                                     Multiplication-    17. Interpret multiplication statements and number sentences,
                                     related vocabulary using terms such as 'sets of', 'times', 'product', etc.

                                     Multiplication of  18. Calculate the product of two one-digit numbers, with
                    Multiplication of one-digit numbers products up to 60.
                                                                                                                                 11
                    whole numbers
                                                        19. Explain the properties of multiplication (e.g., any number
                                     Properties of
                                                        times 1 equals the number, the product of two numbers is the
                                     multiplication
                                                        same even if their order is changed, 3 x 4 = 4 x 3 = 12).
                                                          20. Use several strategies (e.g., concrete objects, skip counting,
                                     Basic facts          properties of multiplication) to develop the multiplication basic
                                                          facts for the 2, 3, 5, and 10 times table.



                                                                         { 27 {
                                                 Chapter 4 { Grade 2                                       ≪ Annual Plan ≫

Stra
nds
     Topics                   Sub Topics         Learning Outcomes                                                     Lessons

                                                 6. Describe how data are represented in a table.

                                                 7. Record collected data in tables.

                                                 8. Describe how data are represented in pictographs and bar
                                                 graphs.

 Statistics
                              Use of tables,
                   Data                                                                                                    1.7
               Representation pictographs, and   9. Explain the benefits of presenting data in tables and graphs.       10 wk
                              bar graphs
                                                 10. Select appropriate means, pictograph or bar graph, to
                                                 graphically represent collected data.

                                                 11. Represent recorded data by completing pictographs or bar
                                                 graphs for which an outline or grid has been provided, and in
                                                 which one picture or bar represents one unit of data.

                              Sides of two-      6. Identify the sides of a two-dimensional shape.
                              dimensional
                                                 7. Describe two-dimensional shapes in terms of the number and
                              shapes
                                                 length of their sides.
                                                 8. Classify two-dimensional shapes on the basis of their
                              Classification


 Geometry
                                                 attributes, e.g., shape, size, number of sides.
                                                                                                                           1.8
               Plane Shapes Squares,                                                                                    11 wk
                            rectangles, circles, 9. Identify and name squares, rectangles, triangles, and circles.
                            triangles

                                                 10. Sketch squares, rectangles, triangles, and circles.
                              Drawing shapes
                                                 11. Sketch two-dimensional shapes that are a composition of
                                                 squares, rectangles, triangles, and/or circles.

                              Problem solving    13. Create and solve problems involving time.

                              Time-related       14. Use time vocabulary appropriately, e.g., yesterday, today,
                              vocabulary         tomorrow, next week, last week, as soon as, etc.

                                                 15. Name the days of the week and months of the year.

                                                 16. State the number of days in a week and months in a year.
                              Use of the



 Measurement
                              calendar
                                                 17. State and write the date for the current day, and the date of
                   Time                          important events, e.g., their birthday, Christmas Day,                 12 2wk
                                                 Independence Day.

                                                 18. Tell time on the hour, half hour, and quarter hour in a variety
                                                 of ways.

                              Time on the hour, 19. Represent time on the hour, half hour, and quarter hour.
                              half-hour, and
                              quarter hour      20. Use the abbreviation 'a.m.' and 'p.m.' correctly.

                                                 21. Tell and write the time at which certain events occur, e.g.,
                                                 break time, lunch time.


                                                                { 28 {
4.3 { Grade 2 | Term 3


                                                                  Section 4.3
                                                        Grade 2 | Term 3
Stra
nds
     Topics                         Sub Topics          Learning Outcomes                                                      Lessons

                                    Problem solving     17. Create and solve problems involving fractions of a whole.

                                                        18. Identify a unit fraction (1/2. 1/3, 1/4, 1/5, 1/8) of a whole.
                                    Unit fractions
                                                        19. Compare unit fractions.
                                    Comparison of
                                    fractions
                                                        20. Represent a unit fraction of a whole.




  Number Concepts
                                                        21. State and write, in words and numerals, the unit fraction that
                                                        corresponds to a pictorial or concrete representation of a unit
                                                        fraction of a whole.                                                         2.5
                      Fractions                                                                                                 15
                                                                                                                                     wk

                                    Unit fractions      22. Identify a fraction of a whole (e.g., 2/3, 3/4, etc).

                                    Proper fractions    23. Represent a fraction of a whole, using concrete objects or
                                                        diagrams.
                                    Representation of
                                    fractions
                                                        24. State and write, in words and numerals, the proper fraction
                                                        that corresponds to a pictorial or concrete representation of a
                                                        fraction of a whole.

                                                        25. Describe real life situations that involve fractions of a whole.

                                    Problem solving     21. Create and solve problems involving division.

                                    Division as
                                                        22. Illustrate division as repeated subtraction, in a variety of
                                    repeated
                                                        ways: using concrete objects, a number line, or numerals.
                      Division of   subtraction
                                                                                                                                7
                    whole numbers



  Computation
                                                        23. Use appropriate division vocabulary, e.g., number of groups,
                                    Division-related    number of objects in each group, etc.                                        2.0
                                    vocabulary                                                                                       wk
                                                        24. Write number sentences to represent division.

                                    Addition of unit    25. Add two or more unit fractions with like denominator, and
                                    fractions           totals up to 1.
                     Addition of
                                                                                                                                5
                      factions
                                                        26. Create and solve problems involving addition of unit
                                    Problem solving
                                                        fractions.



                                                                       { 29 {
                                                 Chapter 4 { Grade 2                                       ≪ Annual Plan ≫

Stra
nds
     Topics                  Sub Topics          Learning Outcomes                                                   Lessons

                             Reading tables      12. Read the data presented in simple tables, pictographs, and
                             and graphs          bar graphs.


 Statistics
                    Data                                                                                                   1.5
                                                                                                                      9
               Interpretation Answering simple                                                                             wk
                              questions on the
                                                 13. Interpret data in simple tables, pictographs, and bar graphs.
                              information in the
                              graph


                                                 12. Sketch two-dimensional shapes according to given
                                                 descriptions.

                             Drawing shapes      13. Copy drawings of curves and straight lines.



 Geometry
                             Curves and
                                                 14. Draw curves and straight lines.                                       1.8
               Plane Shapes straight lines                                                                            11
                                                                                                                           wk
                                                 15. Sketch pictures to represent descriptions of the relative
                                                 positions of two or more objects.


                             Spatial             16. Describe the relative position of objects using phrases such
                             relationships       as by, on, in, inside, outside, opposite, beside, etc.


                             Problem solving     22. Create and solve problems involving money.

                                                 23. Describe the coins in circulation.

                             Description of the
                             Eastern Caribbean 24. Represent amounts up to $5.00 using coins in a variety of
                             currency           combinations.

                                                 25. Describe the $5, $10, and $20 notes.




 Measurement
                                                 26. Represent values up to $20.00 using $1 coins and notes in
                                                                                                                           2.2
                  Money                          a variety of combinations.                                           13
                                                                                                                           wk
                             Representing
                             amounts of money 27. Find the total value of a combination of notes and coins, up
                                              to a value of $20.00.


                                                 28. Read prices of items.


                                                 29. Find the total cost of two or three items, up to a total of
                             Calculations        $1.00.
                             involving money
                                                 30. Calculate change from $1.00, using counting on.
{ 30 {
