               Chapter 5


Grade 3 ≪ Annual Plan ≫




                 { 31 {
                                                                                               Chapter 5 { Grade 3 ≪ Annual Plan ≫

                                                                Section 5.1
                                                     Grade 3 | Term 1
Stra
nds
     Topics                   Sub Topics            Learning Outcomes                                                               Lessons


                              Use of appropriate
                                                   1. Select an appropriate strategy (calculator, pencil and paper, strategies to
                   General                                      or mental strategy) to investigate number patterns and               2
                              investigate
                              relationships.
                              number concepts



                              Skip counting          2.Count by 2's, 5's, 10's, 20's, and 100's.


                   Counting                          3.Identify the pattern in a sequence of numbers.                                4
                              Sequences of
                              numbers
                                                     4.Complete sequences of numbers.


                              Problem solving        5.Create and solve problems involving whole number concepts.


                                                     6.Read numbers up to 999.




 Number Concepts
                              Reading and
                              writing numbers                                                                                             3.0
                                                    7. Write numbers up to 999 in words and symbols.                                      wk



                                                    8. Identify the place value and total Value of any digit in
                                                    two-and three- digit numbers.
                              Place value

                    Whole
                                                    9. Explain the difference between place value and total value.                   15
                   Numbers


                              Expanded notation 10. Write numbers with up to three digits in expanded notation.



                              Ordering numbers 11. Arrange a set of two- and/or three-digit numbers in
                              order of magnitude and give reasons for the arrangement.



                              12. Round off three-digit numbers to the nearest ten or hundred.
                              Rounding-off
                              numbers
                              13. Round off two-digit numbers to the nearest ten.



                                                                      { 32 {
5.1 { Grade 3 | Term 1


Stra
nds
     Topics                   Sub Topics        Learning Outcomes                                                  Lessons

                                                1. Decide when it is appropriate to carry out computation
                                                mentally, using pencil and paper, or using a calculator.


                                                2. Explain how to use a calculator to carry out the four
                Use of                          basic operations.
                computation
                strategies
                                                3. Use the calculator to carry out calculations, when necessary.
                General                                                                                              6
                                                4. Use mental computation strategies to carry out calculations,
                                                when necessary.

                Estimation                      5. Estimate the answer to a computation.

                                               6. Determine the reasonableness of answers obtained from any
                              Checking answers of the four operations of whole numbers, and give reasons for
                                               their conclusions.

                                                7. Create and solve problems involving addition of whole
                Problem solving
                                                numbers, with totals up to 999.

                Basic facts                     8. Recall the basic facts for addition and subtraction.



  Computation
                                                                                                                         3.0
                                                9. Explain the regrouping process for addition.
                                                                                                                         wk

                                                10. Add numbers with up to three digits, without regrouping.
                Addition without
                and with                        11. Add numbers with up to three digits, with regrouping in one
                regrouping                      column/place only.

                                                12. Add numbers with up to three digits, with regrouping in two
                 Whole                          columns/places.
                                                                                                                    15
                Numbers

                Problem solving                 13. Create and solve problems involving subtraction of
                                                numbers with up to three digits.

                                                14. Recall the basic facts for subtraction.

                                                15. Carry out subtraction involving numbers with up to
                                                three digits, without regrouping.
                Subtraction
                without and with
                regrouping                      16. Carry out subtraction involving numbers with up to
                                                three digits with regrouping in one places/columns.

                                                17. Carry out subtraction involving numbers with up to
                                                three digits with regrouping in two places/column.



                                                              { 33 {
                                                    Chapter 5 { Grade 3                                       ≪ Annual Plan ≫

Stra
nds
     Topics                     Sub Topics          Learning Outcomes                                                    Lessons

                                                     1. Identify and describe situations in everyday life that involve
                                Use of statistics in data collection and data representation.
                 General                                                                                                   2
                                real life
                                                     2. State reasons why people collect data.

                                                    3. Describe how to collect data using observation.

                                Use of observation 4. Describe how to collect data using interviewing.
                                and interviewing
                                                   5. Explain when it is appropriate to use observation and
                                                   interviews to collect data.
              Data Collection                                                                                              8
                                                    6. Create problems that may be answered through data
                                Problem solving
                                                    collection, representation and interpretation.


 Statistics
                                                                                                                                 2.5
                                                    7. Plan for data collection activities.
                                Planning for data                                                                                wk
                                collection          8. Collect sets of data through observation and interviews to
                                                    answer questions of interest.

                                                    9. Explain the concept of 'tally chart'

                                                    10. Explain how to use tallies to construct a table.

                   Data         Use of tally charts, 11. Use tally charts and tables to organise collected data.
                                                                                                                           7
              Representation tables, and graphs 12. Describe the characteristics of pictographs in which one
                                                picture represents one unit of data.

                                                    13. Describe the characteristics of pictographs in which one
                                                    picture represents more than one unit of data.

                                Parts of a three-   1. Identify the faces, edges, and vertices of three-dimensional
                                dimensional         shapes.
                                shape: Faces,
                                edges, and          2. Describe three-dimensional shapes in terms of the number of
                                vertices            edges and vertices, and the number and type of faces.

                                                     3. Describe the cube, cuboid, cylinder, cone, and sphere in
                                                     terms of the number and type of faces and the number of
                                                     edges and vertices.


 Geometry
                 Three-    Concept of a cube,
                                                                                                                                2.0
               Dimensional cuboid, cylinder,  4. Sort examples of the cube, cuboid, cylinder, cone, and                    14
                                                                                                                                wk
                 Shapes cone, and sphere sphere.

                                                    5. Identify and name examples of cube and cuboids, cylinders,
                                                    cones, and spheres.

                            Comparison of           6. Identify the similarities and differences between the cube and
                            cubes and               cuboid.
                            cuboids; cylinders
                                                    7. Identify similarities and differences between the cylinder and
                            and cones
                                                    cone.


                                                                   { 34 {
5.1 { Grade 3 | Term 1


 Stra
 nds
      Topics                  Sub Topics           Learning Outcomes                                              Lessons


                                                   1. Select and use appropriate instruments for measuring
                                                   lengths, heights, mass, and capacity of objects.
                              Selection of
                              instruments and
                              units of             2. Explain how to use the various instruments for
                              measurement          measuring length, mass, and capacity

General                                                                                                            5
                              Use of instruments
                                                   3. Identify the most appropriate unit to measure the length,
                                                   mass, or capacity of a given object and give reasons for
                                                   their selection.



                              Problem solving      4. Create and solve problems involving linear measurement
                                                   and measurement of mass, capacity, or temperature.


                                                   5. Estimate and measure lengths and heights using the
                                                   metre as the unit of measure.

                             Estimation and
                             measurement of        6. Estimate and measure lengths and heights using
                             lengths, heights,     the centimetre as the unit of measure.



  Measurement
                             and distances
                                                                                                                       2.5
                   Linear   Use of the metre       7. Explain why there is a need for a smaller unit of measure        wk
                                                                                                                   7
                Measurement and centimetre as      - the centimetre.
                            units of measure

                                                   8. Estimate and measure distances using the metre as the
                                                   unit of measure.


                Comparison of
                                                   9. Compare linear measures of two or three objects.
                linear measures


                                                   10. Estimate and measure the mass of objects using
                Estimation and                     the kilogram as the unit of measure.
                measurement of
                mass using the
                kilogram and gram                  11. Estimate and measure the mass of objects using the
                                                   gram as the unit of measure.
                Mass                                                                                               6


                                                   12. Identify situations in everyday life where the kilogram
                Comparison of the                  and gram are used as the unit of measure.
                mass of objects
                                                   13. Compare the mass of two or three objects.



                                                                 { 35 {
                                                                                            Chapter 5 { Grade 3 ≪ Annual Plan ≫

                                                                  Section 5.2
                                                        Grade 3 | Term 2
Stra
nds
                       Topics     Sub Topics                Learning Outcomes                                                 Lessons

                                                        14. Explain the concepts of 'even number' and 'odd number'.
                                  Odd and even
                                                        15. Classify numbers as odd or even.
                                  numbers




 Number Concepts
                                                        16. Describe relationships between odd and even numbers.

                       Whole                            17. Define and use number-associated vocabulary, e.g., pair,                 1.5
                                                        dozen, double, triple, etc.                                             10
                      Numbers     Ordinal numbers                                                                                    wk
                                                        18. Identify the ordinal position of an object in an arranged set.
                                  Number-
                                                        19. Identify the object that is in a given ordinal position in an
                                  associated
                                                        arranged set.
                                  vocabulary

                                                        18. Create and solve problems involving multiplication by one-
                                  Problem solving
                                                        digit numbers.

                                                        19. Use several strategies to recall basic facts related to
                                  Multiplication by     multiplication by 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6.
                                  10 and 100



 Computation
                                                        20. Multiply a two-digit number by 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, and 100,
                       Whole                            without and with regrouping.                                                 2.5
                                                                                                                                18
                      Numbers                                                                                                        wk
                                                        21. Create and solve problems involving division by one-digit
                                  Problem solving
                                                        numbers.

                                                        22. Use several strategies to build up the basic facts for division
                                  Division as           by 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6.
                                  repeated
                                  subtraction           23. Use repeated subtraction to divide a two-digit number by a
                                                        one-digit number, without and with remainders.

                                                        14. Describe the characteristics of bar graphs in which
                                one Use of tally charts, block represents one unit of data.
                   tables, and graphs
                                           15. Describe the characteristics of bar graphs in which one
                   block represents more than one unit of data.

                                                      16. Explain why it may be necessary to use one picture or block


 Statistics
                   Data        Introduction to        to represent more than one unit of data.                                       1.8
                                                                                                                                12
                   Representation scales                                                                                             wk
                                                      17. Select an appropriate method (pictograph or bar graph) and
                                                      scale to represent a set of collected data.

                                                      18. Draw pictographs and bar graphs to represent collected
                                Selecting data        data.
                                representation
                                methods               19. Explain the advantages of representing data in tables and
                                                      graphs.



                                                                       { 36 {
5.2 { Grade 3 | Term 2


Stra
nds
                    Topics    Sub Topics              Learning Outcomes                                                Lessons

                              Concept of a         8. Identify and name squares, rectangles, triangles, and circles.
                              square rectangle, 9. Describe squares, rectangles, and triangles in terms of the
                              triangle, and circle number and length of their sides.

                              Line segments       10. Draw and label line segments e.g., line segment AB.

                                                  11. Identify curves and straight line segments.


   Geometry
                              Curves, types of
                                                  12. Explain the concepts of 'open curve' and 'closed curve'.               2.2
                 Plane Shapes curves                                                                                    16
                                                                                                                             wk
                                                  13. Identify and draw open and closed curves.

                              Concept of angle,
                                                14. Explain the concepts of angle and right angle.
                              right angle

                                                 15. Identify the angles in a diagram.
                              Relating angles to
                              the right angle    16. Identify angles that are equal to, greater than, and smaller
                                                 than a right angle.

                                                  14. Estimate and measure the capacity of containers using the
                                                  litre as the unit of measure.

                              Estimation and       15. Estimate and measure the capacity of containers using the
                              measurement of centilitre as the unit of measure.
                   Capacity                                                                                             5
                              capacity using the 16. Describe situations in real life where the litre and centilitre
                              litre and centilitre are used as unit of measure.

                                                  17. Explain why there is a need for the centilitre as a unit
                                                  of measurement of capacity.

                                                   18. Describe real life situations that involve measurement of
                              Instruments for     temperature.
                              measuring



   Measurement
                              temperature         19. Describe the instruments that are used to measure
                                                  temperature.                                                               2.0
                                                                                                                             wk
                 Temperature Reading                                                                                    5
                             measurements of      20. Read recorded temperature.
                             temperature

                              Describing
                                                  21. Describe recorded temperatures using phrases such as
                              measurements of
                                                  'warm', 'very hot', etc.
                              temperature

                              Introduction to
                                                  22. Explain the concept perimeter
                              perimeter

                 PerimeterCalculating                                                                                   4
                              perimeter by    23. Use measurement and addition to calculate the perimeter of
                              measurement and objects.
                              addition



                                                                 { 37 {
                                                                                         Chapter 5 { Grade 3 ≪ Annual Plan ≫

                                                                Section 5.3
                                                      Grade 3 | Term 3
Stra
nds
                      Topics      Sub Topics              Learning Outcomes                                             Lessons

                                  Representation of 20. Represent fractions of a whole or group, using concrete
                                  unit and proper   objects, pictures/diagrams, and numerals.
                                  fractions of a
                                  whole and a group 21. Identify fractions of a whole or group.




 Number Concepts
                                                      22. Explain the concept of a fraction.
                                  Concepts of
                    Fractions     numerator and       23. Explain the concepts of 'numerator' and 'denominator'.        14 2wk
                                  denominator
                                                      24. Identify the numerator and denominator in a fraction.

                                                      25. Compare unit fractions using the symbols '<' and '>'.
                                  Comparison of
                                  fractions           26. Compare fractions with like denominator using the symbols
                                                      '<' and '>'.

                                                      24. Add two proper fractions with like denominator.
                                  Addition of proper



 Computation
                                  fractions with like
                                                      25. Calculate a fraction of a group of objects, using concrete
                                  denominator
                    Fractions                         objects or pictures/diagrams.                                     14 2wk

                                                      26. Create and solve problems involving addition of fractions
                                  Problem solving
                                                      and fractions of a group of objects.

                                  Reading
                                  information
                                                    20. Read data presented in tables, pictographs, and bar graphs.
                                  presented in


 Statistics
                        Data      tables and graphs
                                                                                                                        7    1wk
                   Interpretation Answering
                                  questions based     21. Interpret data presented in tables, pictographs, and bar
                                  on information      graphs.
                                  presented

                                                      17. Describe two-dimensional shapes in terms of the number
                                  Drawing two-        and length of their sides and the number and type of angles.
                                  dimensional
                                  shapes              18. Draw two-dimensional shapes according to specific
                                                      directions (e.g., a shape that is closed with one right angle).

 Geometry
                                                                                                                             1.5
                   Plane Shapes                                                                                         10
                                                      19. Identify objects that are symmetrical.                              wk

                                                      20. Identify and draw the lines of symmetry of a cutout or
                                  Symmetry
                                                      diagram.

                                                      21. Explain what is a line of symmetry.



                                                                    { 38 {
5.3 { Grade 3 | Term 3


 Stra
 nds
      Topics            Sub Topics            Learning Outcomes                                                   Lessons

                                              24. Use appropriate vocabulary in description of real life
                        Time-related
                                              situations involving time, e.g., earlier, later, now, noon,
                        vocabulary
                                              next week, in a week's time, in an hour, etc.


                        Problem solving       25. Create and solve problems involving time.

                        Use of the
                                              26. State and write dates in a variety of ways.
                        calendar


                Time                          27. State and write time on the hour, half-hour, quarter hour        13
                        Time on the hour,     and five-minute intervals in a variety of ways.
                        half-hour, quarter-
                        hour, and five
                        minute intervals      28. Represent time on the hour, half-hour, quarter hour and
                                              five-minute intervals.

                                              29. Use a clock or calendar to determine the duration of
                        Relationships         an event (e.g., a lesson, assembly, school vacation).
                        between units
                        of time               30. State the relationship between units of time: hour
                                              and minute, year and month, week and day.




  Measurement
                        Money-related         31. Use appropriate vocabulary to describe situations
                                                                                                                        3.5
                        vocabulary            involving money, e.g., change, total cost, cost per item, etc.
                                                                                                                        wk

                        Problem solving       32. Create and solve problems involving money.


                        Reading and
                        representing     33. Read and write amounts of money up to $999.
                        amounts of money


                                              34. Identify the coins in circulation.

                Money   Description of                                                                             12
                                          35. Describe the $5, $10, $20, and $50 notes.
                        Eastern Caribbean
                        currency
                                              36. Represent amounts of money up to $50 using various
                                              combinations of notes, $1 coins, and other coins as necessary.


                                              37. Calculate the cost of a set of similar items given the cost
                                              of one item.

                        Calculations          38. Calculate the total cost of a set of items, with totals up to
                        involving money       $20.


39. Calculate change from amounts up to $20.
